
Упражнение  1
1. This is a pen. That is a pencil.  2. This is a book.
It is my book. 3. Is this your pencil? — No, it isn’t my
pencil,  it  is  my sister’s  pencil.  4.  I  have  a sister.  My
sister is an engineer.  My sister’s husband is a doctor.
They have got two children. 5. This is a girl. This girl is
their daughter. Their daughter’s name is Vera. 6. That
is a boy. That boy is her brother. Her brother’s  name is
Nick. 7. This is our flat. 8. We have got a car. Our car
is not expensive but reliable.  9. I have no pet.  10. My
granny  has  got  a  headache.  She  has  no  idea  what  to
do.  11.  I have  a friend.  His name is Mike.  My friend
is very good.  12. It’s a cat.  Its tail is long and bushy.
It’s Mike’s cat.

Упражнение 2
l.When  is  your  birthday?  —  My  birthday  is  (on)
the  first  of  May.  2.  Dp  you  remember  your  mother’s
birthday? — Yes, I do. 3. His uncle is generous and her
aunt is very kind. 4. That man is very clever. His book is
recognized by a lot of people. 5. They know our address.
6.  Their son speaks English very well.  7. My cousin’s
dog is small.  Its  hair is curly.  8.  Is  this a watch?  —
No, it isn’t a watch, it’s a pen. 9. This pen is good, and
that pen is bad.  10.1 can see a pencil on your table, but
I can see no paper. 11. Give me a chair, please. 12. They


have a dog and two cats. 13.1 have a spoon in my  soup
plate,  but  I  have  no  soup  in  it.  14.  My  friend  says
he is going to be a millionaire one day.  15. Would you
like an orange?  16. Mr Smith is an  artist.  Mrs Smith
is a poetess. She is not a singer.

Упражнение 3
1.  He  hasn’t  got  a  car.  But  he’s  got  a  computer.
The computer is new. 2. His friends have got a cat and
a dog.  The dog never bites  the  cat.  3.  This  is  a tree.
The tree is green. 4 .I can see three boys. The boys are
playing.  5.  I have  a bicycle.  The bicycle is black.  My
friend has no bicycle. 6. Our room is large. 7. We wrote
a dictation yesterday.  The dictation was  long.  8.  She
has  two  daughters  and  one  son.  Her  son  is  a  pupil.
9. Last year I gave my mother a bracelet for her birth
day. She liked the bracelet. 10. My brother’s friend has
no dog.  11. This pencil is broken. Give me that pencil,
please.  12.  She  has  a  ball.  The  ball  is  big.  13.  I  got
a letter from my friend yesterday.  The letter was in
teresting.  14. When they were in Geneva,  they stayed
at  a  hotel.  Sometimes  they  had  dinner  at  the  hotel
and  sometimes  in  a  restaurant.  15.  I’ve  got  an  idea.
16. What a surprise! Our parents gave us a DVD player
for Christmas.

Упражнение 4
1. This is a pen. The pen is red. 2. These are pencils.
The pencils are black.  3.  This  is soup.  The soup is  so
tasty. 4. In the morning I eat a sandwich and drink tea.
5. She gave me coffee and a cake. The coffee was hot.
The  cake  was  very  tasty.  6.  Do  you  like  ice  cream?
7. I see a book in your hand.  Is the book interesting?
8.  Do you  need  a  camera?  9.  He  never  eats  meat,  he
always eats vegetables, cereals,  seeds,  fruit,  and nuts.
He is a vegetarian.  10.  This  is  a pineapple.  The  pine-



apple is delicious.  11.  Elaine,  apples are good for you!
12. My cousin is upset. He’s got a sore throat.  13. This
is cottage cheese.  The cottage cheese is fresh.  14. She
bought  meat,  butter  and  potatoes  yesterday.  She  also
bought a cake. The cake was delicious. We ate the cake
and drank tea.  15. This is my table. On the table I have
books,  two pencils,  a pen and paper.  16. This is a bag.
The bag is brown. It is my sister’s bag. And this is my
bag.  It is yellow.

Упражнение 5
1 .1 have two sisters. My sisters are students. 2. We
are  at  home.  3.  My  brother  is  not  at  home,  he  is  at
school.  4.  My  m other  is  at  work.  She  is  a  doctor.
5.  I am not a doctor.  6.  He  has  no  sister.  7.  He is  not
a  pilot.  8.  I  have  thirty-two  teeth.  9.  He  has  a  child.
10.  She  has  two  children.  Her  children  are  at  school.
11.  Is  your  father  at  home?  —  No,  he  is  at  work.
12. Where is your brother?  — He is at home.

Упражнение 6
1. We have a large family. 2. My granny often tells us
long interesting stories. 3. My father is an engineer. He
works in a factory. The factory is large. 4. My mother is
a doctor.  She works at a large hospital.  She is at work
now.  5.  My  aunt  is  a  teacher.  She  works  at  a  school.
The school is  good.  My aunt is  not  at  school  now. She
is at home. She is drinking tea and eating jam. The jam
is sweet.  I am at home,  too.  I am drinking tea and eat
ing  a sandwich.  The  sandwich  is  tasty.  6.  My sister  is
at school.  She  is  a pupil.  7.  My cousin  has  a big black
cat. My cousin’s cat has two kittens. The cat likes milk.
The kittens like milk, too. 8 .1 am an engineer. 9.My son
is  a pupil.  10.  He  is  a good pupil.  11.  This  is  a house.
12. This  is  my  laptop.  13.  You  have  some  pencils,  but
I have no pencil. Give me a pencil, please. 14.  It’s a small
animal that has long ears,  a short tail,  and soft hair.



Упражнение 7
1.  W hat’s  the  weather like  today?  —  The  weather
is fine.  2.  The sun is yellow.  3.  The sky is grey today.
4.  The Earth is a planet.  5.  We had an English  lesson
yesterday.  The teacher asked me many questions.  The
questions were difficult.  6. Where is your brother?  —
He is at  home.  He is  in  his  room.  He  is  sitting at  the
table. He is doing his homework. The homework is diffi
cult. 7. Our cat is sitting on the sofa. 8. It is very dark
in  the  room.  Turn  on  the  light,  please.  9.  Nick  went
into the bathroom, turned on the water and washed his
hands.  10.  Ann  turned  on  the  television  to  watch  the
evening news.  11. She doesn’t often watch TV.  12. You
can’t see the moon in the sky tonight.

Упражнение 8
1. This is a good book. Take the book from the table.
Put  this book  in  the bookcase.  2.  The  weather  is  fine
today.  The sky is blue.  The  sun  is  shining brightly in
the blue sky.  3.  This is a boy.  The boy is at school.  He
is a pupil. This boy is my brother’s friend. He has a cat,
but  he  has  no dog.  He  likes  his  cat.  He  gives  the  cat
milk  every day.  4.  Yesterday  I  received  a  letter from
my friend. The letter wag important. 5. We live in a big
house.  I like the house very much.  6.  Are you a work
er? — No, I am a student. 7 .1 like your beautiful flower.
Give me the flower, please. 8. My mother is at home. She
is reading a marvellous story. 9. My father is not at home.
He is at work.  He is not a lawyer.  He is a doctor.  He is
a good  doctor.  He  works  at  a  hospital.  The  hospital  is
large.  10.  That is a book.  The book is thick.  That book
isn’t thin.  This is an interesting thick book.  11. Those
are books.  The  books  are  new  and  old.  Those  are  new
and old books.  Those books are interesting.



Упражнение 9
1.  There  is  a  big  tree  in  the  garden.  2.  There  is
abanknear  here.  —  W here  is  the  bank?  3.  There  is
anew supermarket in the centre of our town. 4. There is
a hotel over there. The hotel isn’t cheap. 5. Whereas the
cat? — The cat is on the sofa. 6.  Where is the book?  —
The book is on the shelf.  7.  Where are the  flowery?  —
The flowers are in a beautiful vase. 8. Where is the vase? —
The vase is on a little table near the window. 9. Open the
window, please. The weather is fine today. I can see. the sun
in the sky.  I can see a nice little bird. The bird is sitting
in a big tree. The tree is green.  10. There is a little white
cloud in the sky.  11. W hat a beautiful day! 12. We have
a large room.  There is a big sofa in the room and a little
lamp on the wall over the sofa.  I  like to  sit on the sofa
and read a good book.  13. This is a computer. The com
puter  isn’t  old.  This  computer  is  new.  This  is  a good
new computer.  14. These are computers. The computers
are  new.  These  aren’t  old  computers.  These  are  new
computers.  These computers are good.

Упражнение  10
1.  There  is  a wonderful  small computer  in  front  of
the  books  there.  2.  Where  is  the  soup?  —  The  soup
is  in  a big  saucepan  on  the  gas  cooker.  3.  Where  are
the  cutlets?  —  The  cutlets  are  in  the  refrigerator  on
a little plate.  4.  There is no bread on the table.  Where
is  the bread?  5.  There  is  a little brown  coffee  table  in
our room in front of the sofa.  6.  Where is the table in
your room?  7.  There  is  a  thick  carpet  on  the  floor  in
my mother’s room. 8.  Is your brother at home?  — No,
he  is  at  work.  He  works  in  a  big  factory.  He  is  an
engineer.  9.  My sister has many books.  The books are
in a big bookcase.  She  has  really good  taste  in books.
10.  The  weather  is  fine  today.  Let’s  go  and  play  in



the yard. There are many children in the yard. They are
playing with a ball.



Упражнение  11
1.1 see a bottle of pineapple juice on the kitchen table.
2. Her son has a great sense of humor. 3. There was a disco
at the club last Sunday but he didn’t go. 4. Is there a bus
stop near the building? 5. We have a big dog. The dog
is very clever. 6. My friend has a very good computer.
7. This boy is big. He is a student. 8. There is a large
piano in the hall. 9. This is a tree and that is not a tree.
It’s a bush. 10.1 am a boy. I am a pupil. I study at school.
11. My sister is at work. She is a secretary. She works
for a new company. 12. This is a very difficult question.
I don’t know the answer to it. 13. Do you see a little girl
with a big ball in her hands? She is a pupil of our school.
14. There was a beautiful flower in this vase yesterday.
Where is the flower now?  15. Last year we were in Ge
neva. It is an exciting city to visit, but a very expensive
place to live.

Упражнение  12
1.  There  is  a jar  of  delicious  orange  marmalade  in
the middle of the shelf.  2.  There is a big box of cereal
to the right of you.  3.  There is a bunch of bananas on
the table.  Don’t keep them in the fridge.  4.  There is a
loaf of white bread on the upper shelf of the fridge.  If
you want your bread to be fresh, keep it in the fridge.
5. Is there a bag of flour in the cupboard? 6. There was
a bottle of drinking water in the corner of the kitchen.
7. There is a thick red  carpet in my room.  The carpet
is  on  the  floor  in  front  of  the  sofa.  8.  W here  is  the
table in your brother’s  room?  —  His table is  near the
window.  9.  I  can  see  a  fine  vase  on  the  shelf.  There
are  lovely flowers in the vase.  10. They have no piano
in their living room.  11.  My uncle is  married.  He  has



a beautiful  wife.  They  have  a  son,  but  they  have  no
daughter. 12.1 can see a nice coffee table in the middle
of the  room  to  the  right  of  the  door.  It  is  black  and
red. I like the coffee table.  13. Our TV set is on a little
table in the corner of the room. 14. There is a beautiful
picture in my father’s study. The picture is on the wall
to the left of the window.  15. What a picture!

Упражнение 13
My aunt’s flat is in a new house.  There is a living
room,  a bedroom,  a study,  a bathroom  and  a kitchen
in  the  flat.  The  bedroom  is  a  large  room  with  two
windows.  The room is light as the windows are large.
There are white curtains on the windows. There are two
beds with large pillows on them. There are small tables
near the beds. There are lamps on them. To the left of
the door there is a dressing table with a mirror on it
There  is  a low  chair  at  the  dressing  table.  There  are
several  pictures  on  the  pale  green  walls.  There  is  a
thick carpet on the floor. The carpet is dark green. The
room is very cosy.

Упражнение 14
1.  There  is  a  park  behind  the  hospital.  There  are
(some) beautiful trees in the park.  2.  There is a good
film  on  TV  this  evening.  I  am  going  to  watch  it.
3. There is a library between the school and the bank.
There  are  (some)  English  and  German  books  in  this
library.  4.  There is  a sofa in  the corner of the room.
5.  There  are  (some)  cushions  on  the  sofa.  6.  There
are (some) books on the shelf. Give me a book, please.
7. What can you see in the fridge? —  There is a sausage
on the top shelf, but there is no cheese there. There is
(some) butter in the butter dish.  There are (some) to
matoes and (some) carrots on the bottom shelf.  There
are  (some)  eggs  and  (some)  apples  on  the  next  shelf.
There is an orange,  a lemon, and (some) jam in a little



jar there. 8. There is (some) juice in this carton. May I
drink the juice?  9.  There are (some) girls in the yard,
but I can see  no boys.  Where are the boys?  —  Oh, all
the boys are playing football at the stadium.  10. There
is  a  peculiar  charm  in  her  voice.  11.  There  is  (some)
money in the purse.

Упражнение  15
1. Where is the bus station? — The bus station is next
to the gas station.  2.  There are two pets in the house:
a cat and a dog.  3.  There is a TV antenna on the roof.
4. There is a mailbox between the building and the bus
stop.  5.  There  is  a  big  dog  in  front  of  the  fireplace.
6. Do you speak English at work? 7. She had a bad day
today. 8 .1 have a colour TV set. The TV set is on a little
table in the corner of the room. 9. There is a book, a pen,
and (some) paper on my writing desk.  10. My brother is
a teacher. He works at a school. He has very good books.
His books are in a big bookcase. 11. There is (some) tea in
my glass. There is no tea in my friend’s glass. His glass
is empty.  12. Where is the coffee table in your room? —
The coffee table is in front of the sofa. There is a cup on
the coffee table and a box of chocolates.  There is (some)
coffee in the cup.  13. There are (some) photographs and
(some)  newspapers  on  the  sofa.  14.  There  is  a  guitar
on the chair near the piano.  15.  There was  a piano  in
the corner of the living room.  He sat at the piano for
hours,  playing favourite pieces  from classical  music.
He was a wonderful piano player.

Упражнение  16
1. Every day my brother and I get up at eight o’clock
and walk to school.  I like school.  It’s fun.  My brother
loves football.  He  hates  homework.  So  he doesn’t  like
to  go  to  school.  Will  he  go  to  work  in  the  future?
2. My friend has to get up early in the morning because


he  goes  to  school.  That’s  why  he  usually  goes  to bed
early in the evening.  3.  The weather was very bad  in
the  morning yesterday.  The  sky was  grey  and  it  was
raining. But in the middle of the day the weather began
to change. The rain stopped and the sun appeared from
behind the clouds. It was very warm in the afternoon.
I did not want to stay at home and went into the yard.
There were boys  and  girls  in  the  yard.  We  played  in
the yard till  late  in the evening.  When I came  home,
I  drank  tea,  ate  a sandwich  and went  to bed  at  once.
I slept very well at night.

Упражнение  17
1.  My brother is a pupil. He goes to school. He goes
to  school  in  the  morning.  He  has  five  or  six  lessons
every day. In the afternoon he goes home. At home he
does his homework. In the evening he reads books. He
usually goes to bed at half past ten. At night he sleeps.
2.  My father goes  to work  in  the  morning and  comes
home in the evening.  3.  I get up at half past seven in
the  morning  and  go  to  bed  at  a quarter  to  eleven  in
the  evening.  4.  When  does  your  mother  leave  home
for  work?  —  She  leaves  home  for  work  at  a  quarter
past eight.  5.  When do you leave home for school?  —
I leave home for school at half past  eight. 6. What do
you do when you come home from school? —  I do my
homework, talk to my friends on the phone and go for
walks.  I often  listen to  music.  I like jazz best.  Some
times I play computer games.

Упражнение  18
1.  We always go to the Russian Museum on Sunday.
2.  She usually goes to the Philharmonic on Saturday.
3. He has his birthday in August. He is planning to have
a nice party with his friends. 4. There are three rooms
and a kitchen in our new flat. 5. My new dress is made


of silk. 6. If you want to write something on the black
board, you must have a piece of chalk. 7. Are there any
pupils in the classroom? 8. I have a new English book.
I find the book quite fascinating. 9. There is a garden
in front of our school.  The garden is not large, but it
is very  nice.  10.  May is the fifth month of the year.
11. Saturday is the sixth day of the week.  12. Sunday
is a day off.  13. Today is the ninth of May. Anton has
got a new mobile phone.  He is going to make a phone
call to his grandfather. 14. This is a nice place. In June
we are going there for a holiday. It’ll be great fun.

Упражнение 19
1.  This is  a classroom.  The  classroom  is  large  and
light.  2. There is a picture on the wall.  3. What is the
date  today?  —  It  is  the  seventh  of  December.  4.  The
third lesson today is the lesson of English. 5. Pete, go to
the blackboard. 6. After school I usually go home. 7. My
father always comes from work late: at eight o’clock or
at half past eight. But on Friday he comes home early:
at half past four or at a quarter to five. On Saturday and
on Sunday he does not go to work. 8. My friends live in
a small town. It is a new town. The streets in the town
are broad and straight. There are beautiful buildings in
them.  The town is very green,  and so the air is fresh.
There  are  (some)  beautiful  parks  and  gardens  in  the
town. People like to go there after work. In the evening
you can hear the sounds of music from the parks. There
are  (some)  schools,  (some)  libraries,  a  supermarket,
a hospital, a theatre, (some) cinemas, (some) clinics and
(some) kindergartens in the town.

Упражнение 20
I  go  to  school  in  the morning,  so  I  get  up  early.
I  usually  get  up  at  a quarter  past  seven.  I  go  to  the
bathroom,  turn  on  the  water  and  wash  my  face  and
hands.  My father and mother also get up early in the


morning. Му mother works in an office. She is a typist.
My father is a doctor. He works at a hospital. We have
breakfast in the kitchen. We eat porridge and eggs. We
drink tea. My father and mother leave home for work
at half past eight. My father goes to the hospital, and
my mother goes to the office. I don’t leave home with
my parents: the school where I study is near our house.
I leave home for school at a quarter to nine. My granny
stays at  home and cooks dinner. I have lunch at school
after the third lesson. My father and mother have lunch
at work. When we come home, we have dinner.

Упражнение 21
1. Every day my husband goes to work, my son goes
to school and  I go  to the institute.  2.  There is  a new
school at the corner of our street. 3. My daughter came
home from school on Monday and said to me,  “There
will  be  a  parents’  meeting  on  the  tenth  of  February
at six o’clock in the evening.” 4.  The teacher read us
a very interesting story at the lesson. 5. When the bell
rang,  the  pupils  went  into  the  classroom.  6.  We  are
usually at school from nine o’clock in the morning till
two o’clock in the afternoon. 7. We don’t go to school
on Sunday. 8. We stay at home and relax. I like to read
books for relaxation.

Упражнение 22
1. What do you do after breakfast? — After break
fast I go to school.  2.  My granny likes to read a book
after  lunch.  3.  People  usually  have  breakfast  in  the
morning.  They  have  dinner  in  the  afternoon.  In  the
evening  people  have  supper.  4.  There  is  a  proverb:
“After dinner sleep awhile, after supper walk a mile.”
5.  Who  cooks  dinner  in  your  family?  6.  Yesterday
father  told  us  a  very  amusing  story  at  breakfast.
7.  What did you have for lunch at school on Wednes
day? — We had salad and tea. 8. My mother never has


supper with the family because she does not like to eat
in the evening. 9. When do you clean your teeth in the
morning: before breakfast or after breakfast? 10.1 make
cakes for tea.

Упражнение 23
1. For breakfast I have coffee with milk and sugar.
I have jam, too. There are different things on the din
ner  table.  There  is  (some)  bread,  (some)  butter  and
(some) ham.  There are (some) cups and (some) glasses
there. There is a jug on the table. The milk in the jug
is hot.  There is  a teapot on the  table.  There  is  tea in
the teapot. The tea is hot, too. There are (some) plates,
(some)  forks  and  (some)  knives  on  the  table.  2.  The
lamp is on  the  table.  3.  There is a lamp on the  table.
4. Is there a lamp on the table?  5.  Is the lamp on the
table?  6.  Is  there  a  clock  on  the  wall?  7.  There  are
two shelves on the wall.  8.  Where are the shelves?  —
The shelves are on the wall.  9. They have a large flat.
There are four rooms in the flat.  10. Is the newspaper
on  the  table?  11.  Is  there  a  newspaper  on  the  table?
12.  There is (some) butter on the plate.  13.  Where is
the butter? — The butter is on a little plate.  14. There
is (some) white and  brown bread on the table. 15. What
time do you usually have dinner?  —  We  have dinner
at five.  16. We often have fish for dinner.

Упражнение 24
1.  Pete  has  a  small  family.  He  has  a  father  arid
a mother.  He has no brother, but he has a sister.  His
sister is a pupil. She is a good girl. She has many Rus
sian books, but she has no English books.  2. There is
a writing desk in the room.  The writing desk is good.
There is a lamp on the writing desk.  3.  My uncle has
a large family. They are six in the family. 4. My father
is an engineer.  He works in a big factory.  5. We have



a good library. Our books are in a big bookcase. 6. Is your
sister married? 7. W hat do you do after breakfast? —
I go to school.  8.  When do you come home?  — I come
home  at  half past two.  9.  Do you like to watch TV in
the evening?  10.  He watches  TV  all  day.  I  never do it.
I can’t watch TV very often. But tonight I can spend the
evening in front of the box, because there is a very excit
ing film on. It is “My Fair Lady” with Rex Harrison and
Audrey Hepburn. I love it.  11. We bought a new telly last
week.  12. Is there anything good on telly tonight?

Упражнение 25
1.  My aunt and my uncle are doctors. They work at
a hospital. They get up at seven o’clock in the morning.
They go to bed at eleven o’clock. 2 .1 work in the morning
and in the afternoon. I don’t work in the evening. I sleep
at  night.  3.  When  do  you  leave  home  for  school?  —
I  leave  home  at  a  quarter  past  eight  in  the  morning.
4. What does your mother do after breakfast? — She goes
to work.  5.  Is there a sofa in your living room? — Yes,
there is a cosy little sofa in the living room.  — Where
is the sofa? — It is in the corner of the room to the left
of the door.  I like to sit on this sofa in front of the TV
set in  the evening.  6.  There is  a nice  coffee  table  near
the window.  There are (some) newspapers on the coffee
table. 7. There is (some) tea in the cup. 8. When do you
watch TV? — I watch TV in the evening. We have a large
colour  TV  set  in  our  room.  There  is  a  beautiful  vase
on  the  TV  set.  There  are  (some)  flowers  in  the  vase.
9.  I  have  a  large'w riting  desk  in  the  study.  There  is
(some) paper on the writing desk. My books and exercise
books are on the writing desk,  too.

Упражнение 26
My friend’s flat is very comfortable. There are three
rooms in the flat: a living room, a study and a bedroom.



The living room is not very large. The walls in the liv
ing  room  are  blue.  There  are  (some)  pictures  on  the
walls.  There is a table in the middle of the room with
some chairs around it. There is a sofa to the left of the
door. Near the sofa there are two large armchairs. They
are very comfortable.  There is  a piano  in my friend’s
living  room.  The  piano  is  to  the  right  of  the  door.
The  bedroom  and  the  study  are  small.  The  furniture
in the flat is brown.

Упражнение 27
1. What colour is your new hat? — It’s red. 2. Is there
a refrigerator in your kitchen? 3. Where is the refrigera
tor in your kitchen? — It is in the comer of the kitchen.
4. There are (some) flowers in our living room. The flow
ers are in a beautiful vase.  5.  I  have  (some)  tea in  my
cup.  6.  He has  no coffee in  his  cup.  7.  W hat book did
you  borrow  from  the  library  on  Tuesday?  8.  I  have
(some) books, exercise books and pens in my bag. 9 .1 am
an engineer.  I  work  in  an  office.  I  go  to  the  office  in
the morning. As the office is far from the house I live
in,  I take a bus to get there.  10.  W hat bus do you take
to get to work?  11. Whose pen is this?  12. W hat colour
is  your  new  T-shirt?  —  It’s  white.  13.  She  is  going  to
a music shop to buy a cassette.  — W hat cassette is she
going to buy?  14.  That’s  the  man whose computer was
stolen  last  night.  15.  W hat  books  do  you  like  to  read?
16.1 don’t know what music you are listening to.

Упражнение 28
Here is a large window. We can see a room through
the  window.  Opposite  the  window  there  is  a  door.
On the door there is a curtain. In the corner of the room
there  is  a  round  table.  We  can  see  (some)  books
and a telephone on it. There is a bookshelf over the ta
ble.  On  the  bookshelf  we  can  see  (some)  newspapers


and a book by Jack London. There are two pictures in
the room. One picture is small, the other picture is very
large. There are two bookcases in the room. The book
cases  are  full  of  books.  There  is  a  large  sofa  in  the
room. We can see a bag on the sofa. Whose bag is that?
There is no bed in the room.  There are (some) flowers
and a glass of water on a small table near the window.
We  can  see  an  armchair in  front  of the  window.  It  is
a comfortable armchair.

Упражнение 29
1.  English is an international language.  2.  I study
English.  I attend  English  classes  in  the  evening.  On
the  days  when  I  have  no  classes,  I  stay  at  home  and
do  some  work  about  the  house.  I  have  dinner  with
my  family.  After  dinner  I  talk  with  the  members  of
my family,  watch TV and read books,  newspapers and
magazines. I go to bed late at night. 3 .1 am thirsty. Give
me some water, please. 4. There is a book on the table.
Give me the book,  please.  5.  I enjoy listening to music
but I don’t really like the music which that man performs
on his guitar. 6. What did you have for lunch? — I only
had  a  tuna  sandwich.  7.  He  is  a  wonderful  teacher.
He teaches English. 8. His son is planning to get a degree
in computer science.

Упражнение 30
1. When my grandfather was a young man, he stud
ied physics.  2.  Do you speak Spanish?  3.  My uncle is
a great specialist in English literature. 4. Japanese is
more difficult than French. 5. We listened to a very in
teresting lecture on English history yesterday. 6. Yester
day at the lesson of geography the teacher told us (some)
very interesting things about famous travellers. 7. My
father speaks English and French, but he does not speak
German. 8. We had a lesson of mathematics yesterday.



We wrote a paper in mathematics.  The teacher said,
“I  shall  correct the papers in  the  evening.  Tomorrow
you will know the results”. 9. My brother is an expert
in geology. He enjoys the beauties of nature of Siberia.
10. My friend is studying law.

Упражнение 31
1.  Do  you  play  the  piano?  2.  There  is  a big  black
piano in our living room. It is at the wall to the left of
the door opposite the sideboard. My mother likes to play
the  piano.  She  often  plays  the  piano  in  the  evening.
3.  Boys  like  to  play  football.  4.  What  do  you  do  in
the evening? — I often play chess with my grandfather.
5. Where are the children? — Oh, they are out of doors.
The weather is fine today. They are playing badminton
in  the  yard.  6.  What  games  does  your  sister dike  to
play? — She likes to play tennis. 7. Do you like to play
the guitar? 8. What colour is your guitar? 9. My name
is Charlie. I come from a pretty big family. I have two
brothers and a sister. My sister  plays the violin really
well and wants to be a professional musician.  She has
other hobbies, too, and she often goes swimming with
her friends if the weather is nice. After work I like to
relax.  I play the piano for relaxation.  И there is time,
my brothers and I play golf on Sunday.

Упражнение 32
It was  a hot day.  The sun was  shining brightly in
the blue sky. A Wolf and a lamb met at a stream.  The
water in the stream was cool and clear.  The wolf saw
that the lamb was fat and wanted to eat it. He began to
shout, “You, fool, you are making the water dirty!” The
lamb was afraid of the wolf. It looked at the wolf and
said in a thin voice, “But, Mr Wolf, I cannot make the
water dirty for you from the place where I am standing*
because the stream runs from you to me.” “Stop talk-


ing!” shouted the wolf in an angry voice.  “I know you!
I met you six months ago,  and you were very rude to
me.” “You are wrong, Mr Wolf,” cried the lamb, “you
could not have met me six months ago: I am only four
months old.” “Never mind,” said the wolf, “if it wasn’t
you,  it  was  your brother.”  And  with  these  words  he
seized the poor lamb and carried it into the wood.

Упражнение 33
1. Bill Robins was a very rich man. He was the rich
est man in the village.  2. Pete is the tallest boy in our
class.  Nick is the shortest boy,  but he is very strong.
He is stronger than many boys who are taller than he.
I think Nick is the strongest boy in the class. 3. Granny
often  tells  us  long  stories.  Today her  story was  even
longer.  It  was  the  longest  story.  She began  telling  it
after dinner and finished only before supper.  But the
story was very interesting.  I think it was the most in
teresting of Granny’s stories.  4.  Which was the most
difficult  exercise  in  the  paper?  5.  Which  is  the  best
season of the year? 6.  February is the shortest month
of the  year.  7.  Do  you  know  the  longest  river in  our
country? 8. In May the days are longer than in April.
9. He is the most  intelligent person I know.

Упражнение 34
1.  Moscow  is  situated  on  the  Moscow  River.  The
Moscow  is  a  river  that  moves  very  slowly.  There  is
a canal called the Moscow-Volga Canal which joins the
Moscow to the Volga. The Volga runs into the Caspian
Sea.  2.  Several  rivers  run  into  the  sea  in  New  York
City.  The  most important  is  the  Hudson  River which
empties  into  the Atlantic  Ocean.  Besides  the Hudson
there are two other rivers: the East River and the Har
lem  River.  3.  There  are  many  long  rivers  in  Siberia:
the Ob, the Irtysh, the Yenissei, the Lena and the Amur.
4.  The  Altai  Mountains  are  higher  than  the  Urals.


5. There is a splendid view of Lake Geneva from this ho
tel. 6. My friends have travelled a lot. This year they are
going to fly to the Canary Islands. 7. What river flows
through  London?  —  The Thames.  8.  What  country is
Washington the capital of? — The United States. 9. The
United Kingdom consists of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland.  10.  Chicago is situated on Lake Michigan.

Упражнение 35
Veliky Novgorod, also known as Novgorod, is an im
portant city in Northwest Russia. It is the administra
tive centre of Novgorod Oblast, a province that borders
with  Leningrad  Oblast,  Vologda Oblast,  Tver  Oblast,
and  Pskov  Oblast.  Novgorod  lies  along  the  Volkhov
River just below its outflow from Lake Ilmen.
Novgorod is one of the most important historic cit
ies in  Russia.  It was the  second  most  important  city
after  Kiev  in  medieval  Russia.  The  Novgorod  city
state,  or  the  Novgorod  Republic,  controlled  most  of
Europe’s northeast,  stretching from the Baltic Sea to
the Ural Mountains, making it one of the largest states
in  medieval  Europe.  Cities  such  as  Staraya  Russa,
Staraya  Ladoga,  Torzhok,  and  Oreshek  were  part  of
The Novgorod Republic. In the 12th-15th century, the
Novgorod Republic expanded east and northeast.  The
Novgorodians explored the lands around Lake Onega,
along the Northern Dvina, and coastlines of the White
Sea.  In the  14th  century,  the Novgorodians  explored
the Arctic Ocean,  the Barents Sea, the Kara Sea,  and
the West-Siberian River Ob.
Novgorod’s power was based on international trade.
The city was  the main  Russian port for many centu
ries.  It  was  located  at  the  north-western  end  of  the
Silk  Road  from  China  and  at  the  eastern  end  of  the
Baltic Sea trade network established by the Hanseatic
League.



Упражнение 36
1. The Thames is a short river. 2. Russia is washed by
the Arctic Ocean in the north. 3,  Kiev is to the south of
Moscow. 4. Europe is a continent. 5. Moscow is the capital
of Russia. 6. Is Asia an island or a continent? 7. The Black
Sea is in the south of our country. 8. The W hite Sea is in
the north of our country. 9. The Philippines are situated
to the southeast of Asia.  10. This is a map of the world.
Can  you  read  maps?  W hat  can  you  see  on  the  map?
W hat  colour  are  the  valleys  on  the  map?  11.  Petrov
is  an  architect.  He  is  an  experienced  architect.  He  is
in  the  Far  East.  He  has  a beautiful  wife.  His  wife  is
a dentist. They have a son and a daughter.

Упражнение 37
1. The Neva flows into the Gulf of Finland. 2. The Pa
cific  Ocean  is  very  deep.  3.  The  Urals  are  not  very
high. 4.  Elbrus is the highest peak of the Caucasus; but
it’s  the  highest  mountain  in  Europe  too.  5.  The  Alps
are  covered  with  snow.  6.  The  Shetland  Islands  are
situated to the north of Great Britain.  7.  Is Canada the
largest  country  in  America?  8.  The  Crimea  is  washed
by  the  Black  Sea.  9.  Lake  Baikal  is  the  deepest  lake
in  the  world.  10.  Is  P aris  the  capital  of  France?
11.  Lomonosov was born in a small village on the shore
of the  W hite  Sea.  12.  Gogol  was  born  in  the  Ukraine
in  1809.  13.  The  Caucasus  separates  the  Black  Sea
from  the  Caspian  Sea.  14.  Europe  and  America  are
separated  by  the  Atlantic  Ocean.  15.  The Baltic Sea is
stormy in winter. 16. There are many small islands in the
Pacific Ocean.  17.  The North Sea separates the British
Isles from Europe.  18. The Balkans are old mountains.
19.  The  Nile  flows  across  the  northeastern  part  of
Africa  to  the  Mediterranean  Sea.  20.  W hich  are  the
highest mountains in Russia? 21. When was she in the
USA?  22. When was he in Ethiopia?



Упражнение 38
1.  Russia  occupies  the  eastern  half  of  Europe
and the  northern  third  of Asia.  2.  The climate  of the
northern  part  of  Russia  is  severe.  3.  This  winter  is
a true Russian winter with  hard  frosts.  4.  It  is warm
in  the  Crimea  and  the  Caucasus.  5.  Washington  is
the capital of the United States of America.  6.  I want
to go to New York some day.  7.  The best way to know
and  understand  the  people  of  other  countries  is  to
meet them in their own homes. 8. Is Australia an island
or a continent?  9.  The Red Sea is between Africa and
Asia.  10.  France  is  to  the  north  of  Italy.  Paris  is  the
capital of  France. 11. There are seven continents on the
Earth.

Упражнение 39
The XXI Olympic Winter Games were a major inter
national sports event held on February 12-28, 2010, in
Vancouver,  British Columbia,  Canada. Approximately
2,600 athletes of 82 nations participated in 86 events
in fifteen disciplines. There were seven countries par
ticipating in winter Olympics for the first time:  Cay
man Islands, Colombia, Ghana, Montenegro, Pakistan,
Peru and Serbia.

2010  Winter  Olympics  were  the  third  Olympics
hosted  by  Canada,  and  the  first  by  the  province  of
British Columbia. Previously, Canada hosted the 1976
Summer Olympics in Montreal,  Quebec,  and the  1988
Winter  Olympics  in  Calgary,  Alberta.  For  the  first
time,  Canada won  gold  at  the  Olympic  Games  hosted
at home. With  14 gold medals, Canada also broke the
record  for  the  most  number  of  gold  medals  won  at
a single Winter Olympics by any country.



Упражнение  40
1.  This  is  a  pen.  It  is  a  good  pen.  The  pen  is  black.
It  is  on  the  table.  2.  I  have  got  a  dog.  The  dog’s  name
is  Spot.  He  is  a  big  grey  dog.  The  dog  is  very  strong.
3.  My  friend  has  a  sister.  Her  name  is  Ann.  The  girl
is  a  pupil.  4.  We  have  a  picture  in  the  living  room.
The  picture  is  really  very  fine.  It  is  on  the  w all.
5.  The  Irish  Sea  is  between  Great  Britain  and  Ireland.
6.  There  is  a  map  on  the  wall  of  the  classroom.  It  is
a  map  of  the  world.  There  are  many  seas  and  lakes  on
the  map.  This is  the  Mediterranean  Sea  and  that  is  the
Red Sea.  These are the Himalayas.  They are the highest
mountains  in  the  world.  Everest,  which  is  8848  metres
high,  is  the  highest  mountain  in  the  world.  7.  We  live
in  St  Petersburg.  St  Petersburg  is  a  very  large  city.
It  is  one  of  the  largest  cities  in  Russia.  8.  My  brother
is  a  programmer.  His  flat  is  in  the  centre  of  the  city.
It  is  in  a  large  building.  There  are  three  rooms  in  the
flat.  The  living  room  is  the  largest  of  all.  It  is  a  nice
light room.  There are (some) pictures on the walls.  There
is a large oval mirror over the fireplace. There is a round
table in the middle of the room.  There is a sofa at the wall
with  a  large  thick  carpet  in  front  of  it.  The  study  and
the bedroom  are  small,  but very comfortable.

Упражнение  41
1. Did you have a good time in the country? —  Oh, yes.
The weather was fine.  We were out of doors from morn
ing  till  night.  We  played  football,  volleyball  and  other
games.  We  came  home  late  at  night  and  went  to bed  at
once.  2.  Look at the clock! It is a quarter past ten.  Go to
bed  at  once.  3.  The  sun  rises  in  the  east and  sets  in  the
west. 4.  We spent last summer in the Ukraine,  in a little
village on the bank of a big river with very warm water.
There was a forest on the other side of the river. We often
went to the forest and gathered a lot of mushrooms. 5. My
friend likes to play chess. He is ready to play chess all day
long.  He is the best chess player in our school.



Упражнение 42
1.  Teckle  comes  from  a  very  old  country  on  the
Nile.  It  is  called  Ethiopia.  Ethiopia  is  a  beautiful
mountainous country. Teckle is a young man. He wants
to become an engineer. He is very happy to be a student
of St  Petersburg University.  He  spends  a lot  of  time
at the library reading and studying different subjects.
Very often in the evening he and his new friends walk
around  the  city talking  about  their  native  countries.
2.  Galina  lives  in  the  Ukraine.  She  lives  in  a  small
village near Odessa. She is a librarian. She always has
a lot of work. Galina wants to enter Moscow University
and now she is preparing for the entrance exams. 3. My
friend  lives  in America.  He  is  a  student.  He  studies
history at Harvard University. 4. Every year, thousands
of students come to Cambridge from overseas to study
English.  Use,  a  German  student,  graduated  from
Cambridge University two years ago. What a talented
girl!

Упражнение 43
Winston Churchill is one of the best known statesmen
of  the  20th  century  and  one  of  the  most  influential
figures  in  British  history.  Over  the  course  of  fifty
years,  Churchill  held  many  positions  in  government
and politics. Before the First World War, he served as
President of the Board of Trade, Home Secretary, and
First  Lord  of  the  Admiralty.  In  1917  Churchill  was
appointed Minister of Munitions. Later, in 1919, lie was
appointed Secretary of State for War and Secretary of
State for Air. In  1919 he was made Secretary of State
for  the  Colonies.  Churchill  was  once  again  appointed
First Lord of the Admiralty at the beginning of World
War  II.  He  was  elected  Prime  Minister  in  1940.  As
Prime  Minister,  Churchill  led  Great  Britain  until
victory  over  Nazi  Germany  had  been  achieved.  After



the  Conservative  Party  lost  the  election,  he  became
Leader  of  the  Opposition.  A fter  winning  the  election
in  1951,  Churchill  again  became  Prime  Minister.  He
retired  as  Prime  Minister in  1955.  Upon  his  death  in
1965,  Queen  Elizabeth  II  granted  him  the  honour  of
a state funeral.

Упражнение 44
Barack Obama1  is the  44th  President  of the United
States of America.  He is the first African American to
hold the office and the first president born outside the
continental United States.

Barack Obama was bom on August 4,1961, in Hawaii,
to a mother from Kansas and a father from Kenya.  He
was  also  raised by  his  grandfather,  who  served  in  the
army, and his grandmother, who worked her way up from
a secretary to become a vice president at a local bank.

He is a graduate of Columbia University and Harvard
Law School. Before earning his law degree, Obama was a
community organizer in Chicago, where he worked to help
rebuild  communities  devastated by  the  closure of local
steel plants. He called that time in his life the best educa
tion he ever had, better than anything he got at Harvard
Law School.  Later,  he worked as a civil rights attorney
and taught at the University of Chicago Law School. He
served three terms in the Illinois State Senate,  until he
was elected to the United States Senate in 2004.

Barack Obama was sworn in as president on January
20, 2009, in the middle of the worst economic crisis the
United States has experienced since the Great Depres
sion, at a time when the country’s economy was losing
800,000 jobs a month.  Since then,  the nation’s private
sector has added more than  10 million jobs during the
longest  period  of  job  growth  in  the  nation’s  history.
Besides  economy-related  initiatives,  President  Obama

1 Barack Obama [Ьэ ra.k au'ba.ma].



ended the U.S.  military involvement in  the Iraq W ar,
increased  the  U.S.  military  presence  in  Afghanistan,
signed  the  arms  control  treaty  with  Russia,  ordered
the U.S. military involvement in Libya in opposition to
Muammar Gaddafi,  and ordered the m ilitary operation
that resulted in the death of Osama bin Laden.

Barack Obama was re-elected President in November
2012.  During  his  second  term,  he  has  promoted  gun
control  policies,  marriage  equality,  equal  pay,  and  a
woman’s right to make her own health decisions. Some
of President Obama’s foreign policy initiatives included
ordering the U.S. military intervention in Iraq, broker
ing a nuclear deal with Iran,  and normalizing the U.S.
relations with Cuba.

He and his wife,  Michelle,  are the proud parents of

two daughters,  Malia and Sasha.

Упражнение 45
When we want to write a letter, we take a piece of pa
per and a pen. We first write our address and the date in
the right-hand comer. We leave three blank lines between
the date and the body of the letter. Then on the left-hand
side we write a greeting.  We may write,  for instance,
“My  dear  brother,”  “Dear  Henry,”  etc.,  and  then  on
the next line we begin the body of the letter. We must
not  forget  to  leave  a  margin  on  the  left-hand  side  of
the page. At the end of the letter we write “Yours,” and
then we sign our name.  We put the letter in  an enve
lope and close the envelope.  On the envelope we write
the  name  and  address  of  the  person  who  will  receive
it. We stick a stamp in the top right-hand comer,  and
then we post the letter.

Упражнение 46
Once there lived a man who was very fond of  gold.
He used to say,  “While I have my gold,  I am the hap-



piest  man  in  the  world.”  And  so  all  his  life  he  saved
money. One day he was travelling in the desert of North
Africa.  He lost his way.  He had no food or water.  He
was almost dying of hunger.  He was  so weak  that  he
could not walk, he could only crawl. The heat was ter
rible.  There  were  only  stones  and  sand  around.  Just
then he saw a bag lying on the sand. He hoped that he
would find  food in it  and  water,  too.  He crawled  up
to the bag and opened it. He saw that the bag was full
of gold.  What  is  the  use of  gold  to  a  hungry  man  in
a desert?  He left the bag on the hot sand,  crying bit
terly,  “I am the most unhappy man in the world.”

Упражнение 47
1.  Let’s  go  to  the  shop.  I  must  buy  (some)  bread
and  milk.  2.  I was  at  the  cinema yesterday.  —  What
film  did  you  see?  —  Oh,  I  saw  a  very  good  film.
I think it is the best film of the year. 3. Do you often go
to the theatre? — No, I don’t. I like to go to the theatre,
but  I  am  very busy.  I  work  from  morning  till  night.
I even have no time to play the piano. 4. Oleg has a lot
of interesting books at home. 5. A lot of tourists from
different countries  come to St Petersburg.  They want
to  see  one  of  the  most  beautiful  cities  in  the  world.
6. My new friend said to me, “I am a first-year student
at Harvard.” 7. We went to the cinema in the evening.
8. What foreign languages does your father speak?  —
He speaks English. He studied English at school. 9. l am
interested  in  biology.  10.  We  played  tennis  at  the
lesson  of physical  training  yesterday.  We  had  a  good
time.  11.  Did you go for a walk yesterday?  — No,  we
didn’t. The weather was bad, and we went to the cinema.
12.  What  are  your friends  doing?  —  Mary  is  playing
the piano. Tom and Nick are playing chess.  13. Do you
go to the market to buy fish and fruit? 14.1 usually buy
all my vegetables at the market.



Упражнение 48
Three  men  came  to  New  York  for  a  holiday.  They
came  to  a  very  large  hotel  and  took  a  room  there.
Their room was on the forty-fifth floor.  In the evening
the friends went to the theatre and came back to the hotel
very late.  “I am very sorry,” said the clerk of the hotel,
“but the lifts do not work tonight.  If you don’t want to
walk  up  to  your  room,  we  shall  make  beds  for  you  in
the hall.” “No,  no,” said one of the friends,  “ho,  thank
you.  We don’t want to sleep in the hall.  W e shall walk
up to our room.” Then he turned to his friends and said,
“It  is  not  easy  to  walk  up  to the  fo rty-fifth   floor,  but
we shall  make it easier.  On the way to the  room I shall
tell you some jokes;  then you,  Andy,  will sing us  some
songs;  then  you,  Peter,  will  tell  us  some  interesting
stories.” So they began walking up to their room.  Tom
told  them  many jokes;  Andy  sang  some  songs.  A t  last
they  came  to  the  thirty-sixth  floor.  They  were  tired
and  decided  to  have  a  rest.  “W ell,”  said  Tom,  “now  it
is your turn,  Peter.  A fter all the jokes,  I would like to
hear  a  sad  story.  Tell  us  a  long  and  interesting  story
with  a  sad  end.”  “The  story  which  I  am  going  to  tell
you,”  said  Peter,  “is  sad  enough.  W e  left  the  key  to
our room  in  the  hall.”

Упражнение 49
Swift,  a  famous  English  writer,  was  travelling  one
day  on  horseback  with  his  servant.  The  weather  was
bad,  it  was  raining,  and  the  roads  were  muddy.  In
the evening the two men came to  an  inn.  Before  going
to  bed  Sw ift  told  his  servant  to  clean  his  boots.  But
the servant was  lazy and did not do it.  In the morning
Swift  asked  the  servant  why  he  had  not  cleaned  the
boots.  “W hat’s  the  use  cleaning  the  boots  now?”  said
the  servant.  “The  roads  are  muddy,  and  the boots  will
soon be dirty again.” “A ll righ t,” said the writer. “Let’s
go. We must continue the journey.” “But I haven’t had



breakfast,”  said the displeased servant.  “Well,  w hat’s
the  use  giving  you  breakfast  now?”  said  Swift.  “You
will  soon be hungry again.”

Упражнение 50
In a small town in the East once there was a man who
had a parrot.  The parrot was taught to say the words:
“There  is  no  doubt  about  it.”  It  used  to  repeat  these
words all day long. Every time it was asked a question,
it gave the same answer,  “There is no doubt about it.”
One  day  the  man  decided  to  sell  the  bird;  so  he  put
the parrot into  the cage  and went  to  the  m arket with
it.  “Twenty pounds for a very clever parrot!” he cried.
A  man  who  was  passing  by  heard  this  and  turned  to
the parrot.  “Are you worth twenty pounds?” he asked.
“There is no doubt about it!” answered the parrot. “W hat
a clever parrot!” said the man and bought the bird.  He
took the parrot home and invited his friends to look at
the clever bird. The friends came and looked at the par
rot and talked to it. Now you m ust know that the man
was not rich.  In fact,  he was often short of money.  So
a week or two later, sitting in an arm chair and looking
at the parrot, he said, “W hat a fool I was to throw away
such a lot of money!” “There is no doubt about it!” cried
the parrot.  And this time the bird was right.

Упражнение 51
A  train  stopped  at  a  little  station.  A  passenger
looked  out of the window of a train carriage  and  saw
a woman selling cakes. The man had not had breakfast
in  the  morning.  He  was  hungry  and  wanted  to  buy
a cake. The woman was standing rather far from the car
riage. The man did not want to go and buy a cake himself
because he was afraid to miss the train.  He saw a boy
who was walking along the platform near the carriage.
He called the boy and asked him, “How much does a cake



cost?” “Threepence, sir,” answered the boy. The man gave
him  a  sixpence  and  said,  “Bring  me  a  cake,  and  with
the  other  threepence buy  a  cake  for yourself.”  The boy
took the money and went to the woman.  A  few minutes
later  the  boy  returned.  He  was  eating  a  cake.  He  gave
the  man  threepence  change  and  said,  “The  woman  had
only one cake,  sir.”

Упражнение 52
A   crow  once  said  to  her  children,  “It’s  high  time
for you to look for food.” W ith these words she turned
them  out  of  the  nest  and  took  them  to  a  field.  But
the crow’s children did not  like the idea.  “W e’d rather
go  back  to  the  nest,”  they  cried.  “ It’s  so  nice  when
you  bring  food  to  us!”  “ Indeed!”  said  their  mother.
“You  are  big  enough  to  feed  yourselves.  My  mother
turned  me  out  of  the  nest  when  I  was  much  younger,
and I had to take care of m yself.”  “But people will  kill
us  with  their  guns,”  said  the  young  crows.  “No  fear
of that,” answered their mother.  “Before people shoot,
they  take  aim,  and  that  takes  tim e.  W hen  you  see
a  man  raising  a  gun  to  his  face,  you  must  just  fly
away.”  “That’s  a  simple  thing  to  do,”  said  the  chil
dren,  “but  supposing  a  man  or  a  boy  wants  to  throw
a stone at us: in such a case he won’t have to take aim .”
“W ell,  then  he  w ill  have  to  bend  down  to  pick  up
a stone,” said the crow.  “But what if he carries a stone
in his hand ready?”  “W hy,  if you  are clever enough to
think of that,” said the mother,  “you are clever enough
to take care of yourselves.” And she flew away leaving
the young  crows  in  the  field.

Упражнение 53
Russia is  such a large country that when it is  night
in  one  part  of  the  country,  it  is  day  in  another  part,
when  it  is  winter  in  one  part  of  the  country,  it  is  al-



ready summer in another. Imagine it is the beginning of
May now. It is spring in St Petersburg. The weather is
fine. It is still cool at night, but it is quite warm in the
afternoon.  It  sometimes  rains,  but the  rain is  warm,
too.  The ground is covered with soft green grass,  and
the trees are covered with green leaves. But while it is
spring in St Petersburg,  it is still winter in the north
of our country at the beginning of May. Here it is cold
and sometimes frosty,  the rivers, and seas are covered
with ice.  The ice does not melt in some places even in
summer.  The  ground  is  covered  with  deep  snow.  In
the  south  of our country  the  weather  is  quite  differ
ent.  It is already summer in the Caucasus.  It is much
warmer than in St Petersburg. Sometimes it is even hot.
The sky is usually cloudless  and it seldom rains here.
People  wear  summer  clothes.  They  enjoy  gardening.
You  should  see  their  gardens  in  the  summertime  —
they are beautiful.

Упражнение 54
1.  Is  th is  an  in te re stin g   book?  Is  th is  a  very
interesting book? Is this the very interesting book you
have spoken about so much?  It is such  an  interesting
book.  Is  it  the  same  book  you  have  recommended  to
us?  2.  She  is  a  teacher.  She  is  a  good  teacher.  She
is a teacher of our school.  She is a teacher of English.
Here  is  the  teacher,  ask  her  the  questions  which
interest  you.  3.  There  is  a  word  in  the  text  which
I  cannot  understand.  There  is  a  very  difficult  word,
too, which I cannot pronounce.  Here is the word I was
looking up  in  the  dictionary.  This word  is  an  adverb.
4.  The  first  men  were  vegetarians.  5.  Serfdom  was
abolished in Russia in the  19th century.  6.  Columbus,
who discovered America, was a native of Genoa. 7. Rome
is an ancient town. 8.  Ireland, Scotland and Wales are
parts of the United Kingdom.  9.  W hat is the name of
the ocean between America and Asia?  —  The  Pacific.


10. Last summer I visited Switzerland and Germany.
11. Amsterdam is the capital of the Netherlands. The Hague
is a city of the Netherlands where that country’s govern
ment is based. 12. It was such a shock. 13. It’s high time
to take a break.

Упражнение 55
Once  there  lived  a  king.  His  name  was  Midas.  He
had  a  little  daughter.  They  lived  in  a beautiful  pal
ace with a wonderful garden around it. The king was
very fond of gold.  He loved gold more than anything
else in the world. One day, when the king was looking
at  his gold,  a young  man  appeared before  him.  “You
are  a  very  rich  man,  Midas,”  said  the  young  man.
“Yes,”  said  the  king,  “but  I  would  like  to  be  richer.
I would like to have a golden touch. I want everything
that  I  touch  to  turn  into  gold.”  The  young  man  was
a  magician,  and  he  gave  the  king  the  golden  touch
which  he  wanted  to  have.  The  king  was  very  happy.
He touched a table, and the table became gold. He went
into the garden. There were beautiful roses in the gar
den. He touched the roses, and they also became gold.
The  king’s  daughter,  who  loved  the  roses  very  much,
saw it  and began  to  cry.  “Don’t  cry,  dear  daughter”,
said the king and touched his daughter’s head. The next
moment the girl turned into a beautiful gold statue.

Упражнение 56
A group of farmers were sitting in a village house,
and among other things they began talking about ech
oes. One of the farmers said that there was a wonder
ful  echo  in  the  field  near  his  farm  where  there  was
a large group of trees. All the other farmers said that
they would like to hear the echo, and the farmer invited
them to come the next afternoon. But the fact was that
the  farmer  did  not  really  have  the  echo  he  had  told



the other farmers about. So when he came home, he sent
for the son of the cook and told him to go to the field,
hide  himself  among  the  trees  and  im itate  everything
that was said. The next day the other farmers came, and
the farmer took them to the field to listen to the won
derful echo. When they were in the field, he shouted at
the top of his voice, “Are you there?” The answer came
back,  “Yes,  I’ve been here for two hours!”

Упражнение 57
It  was  a  nice  summer  day.  The  weather  was  fine,
the sun was shining in the blue sky, the air was fragrant
with the smell of grass  and flowers.  A dog which was
running about the streets of a little town saw a butcher’s
stall with a lot of meat. The dog cautiously approached
the stall and, when the butcher turned away to talk to
a  woman,  quickly  seized  a big  piece  of  meat  and  ran
away  with  it.  On  the  way  home  the  dog  had  to  cross
a stream by a narrow bridge. As he was crossing it,  he
looked down into the stream and saw his reflection in
the water. He thought it was another dog with another
piece of meat. He snapped at the reflection and dropped
his own piece of meat. That’s how the dog was punished
for greediness.

Упражнение 58
On  Sunday  our  family  went  to  the  country.  We
got  up  at  sunrise  and  quickly  had  breakfast.  A fter
breakfast we left home.  There is a little village not far
from  St  Petersburg  where  we  have  friends.  We  went
there by train.  We all had a great time in the country.
The weather was nice, the sky was blue and the sun was
shining.  We stayed out of doors all day long.  We played
volleyball and tennis. At sunset we stopped playing. There
was a beautiful red-and-gold sunset that evening. We sat
watching  the  sunset.  So  we  returned  to  town  late  in



the evening.  When we came home,  we had supper and
went to bed at once.

Упражнение 59
1.  Look  at  the sky.  It  is  covered  with  dark  clouds.
Let’s  hurry  home.  2.  It  was  very  pleasant  to  live  in
the  country  in  summer.  The  weather  was  nice  and  it
rained seldom. Summer is a fine season. 3. How lovely
the night is! There are no clouds in the sky and the air
is  so  fresh.  4.  When  spring  comes,  the  sun  shines
brighter,  the  snow  m elts,  the  days  become  longer.
5.  W inter is a good time for sports.  6.  On Sunday my
friend and I usually go to the country.  We ski,  skate,
play snowballs  and  have  a very good  time.  7.  The  fog
is so  dense  th at  it  is  difficult  to  walk.  8.  My friend
is  a  very  good  chess  player.  9.  In  summer  we  lived
in  the  country  and  went  up  to  town  by  train.  10.  It
is  Sunday  tomorrow.  If  it  is  too  hot  in  town,  we  shall
go to the country.  And on Monday we shall come back.
11.  Autumn  is  the  most  beautiful  season  of the  year.
12. W inter isn’t a depressing season.

Упражнение 60
Last  Tuesday  evening,  when  the  whole  family  was
at home,  a burglar came into the house and stole $500!
When we discovered the loss,  we  called the police.  The
detective could follow his footprints because the burglar’s
shoes were wet and dirty.  Here is what the burglar did.
He broke in through the front  door.  It was  locked,  so
he  broke  the  lock.  Dad  was  reading  a  newspaper  in
the  study near  the  front  door.  He  was  facing  the big
window,  so he didn’t see  the  man,  and  as  he was  also
listening  to  loud  music,  he  didn’t  hear  him.  It  was
raining  and  there  was  thunder,  so  there  was  a  lot  of
noise outside,  too.  The burglar crossed the hall  to the
kitchen. Mum was making a pot of  tea, so he didn’t go


into the kitchen. The man went back across the hall and
looked into the dining room.  There was no one there.
He looked through all the drawers and found $300. But
this  wasn’t  enough.  He  came out  of  the  dining  room
and  went  upstairs.  Tom  was  doing  his  homework  in
his bedroom  and  listening  to  his  Walkman.  The bur
glar went past Tom’s room. Sally was taking a shower
and singing at the top of her lungs.  He went into the
TV room. He opened every drawer but found nothing.
Then he left the TV room,  went back down the stairs
and  into  the  kitchen.  Mum  was  sitting  in  the  living
room with Dad. The burglar was very quiet! He found
$200 in an old teapot on the top shelf of the kitchen
cupboard. Then the man went out through the French
window in the dining room. It wasn’t locked, so it was
easy to get out. The police couldn’t believe it! We never
heard the burglar!

Упражнение 61
1. My brother read to me an extract from the book
which he had brought the day before.  The main char
acter of the book is a young doctor who went to a dis
tant  village  in  Siberia.  2.  The  weather  was  very  bad
in October. We didn’t enjoy the very cool autumn last
year.  3.  When  he  came into  the  room,  he  saw  a  man
sitting on the sofa. He remembered at once that it was
the  man  he had  seen at  the  theatre  the  night before.
4.  Yesterday  I  saw  the  film  you  are  speaking  about.
5.  He  took  a taxi and gave the  address  to  the  driver.
6.  Tower  Bridge  is  the  first  bridge  over  the  Thames
coming from the sea.  Built in  1894 it is a suspension
bridge. The central portion of it can be opened to admit
ships to the docks in this part of the river. When a ship
comes up,  the traffic is  stopped  and  the great bridge
opens in the centre:  its  two halves go up into the air
and the ship passes through.



Упражнение 62
Once  a  Frenchman  was  travelling  in  Sweden.  He
stopped  a t  a  hotel  in  a  little  Swedish  town.  It  was
evening,  the  man was  tired,  so  he  went  to bed  at  once.
In  the  morning  he  had  breakfast  in  the  hotel  restau
rant.  A fter  breakfast  he  went  for  a  walk.  He  walked
along  the  streets  of  the  town,  visited  a  museum  and
(some)  shops.  Presently  he  felt  hungry  and  dropped
into  a  cafe  for  lunch.  He  sat  down  at  a  table,  called
a  waiter  and  ordered  mushrooms.  But  the  Frenchman
did  not  know  Swedish  and  the  w aiter  did  not  know
French. Nobody in the cafe could speak French. Then the
Frenchman took  a piece of paper and  a pencil  and drew
the  picture  of  a  mushroom.  The  waiter  looked  at  the
picture and left the room at once.  Five minutes later he
returned with an umbrella.  W hat  a funny  story!

Упражнение 63
A   guide  was  once  showing  a  group  of  rich  Am eri
can  tourists  the  places  of  interest  in  a  little  town  in
the  south  of  Italy.  He  took  the  tourists  from  place  to
place, but as the town was small, after a while the guide
could not think of anything that might be of interest to
the  Americans.  “Tell  us  something  unusual  about  the
weather or the climate of this place,” said an American
lady  to  the  guide.  “W hat  can  I  tell  her  about  our  cli
mate?” thought the guide.  Then he had an idea.  “W ell,”
he said,  “there is one unusual  thing about our climate.
One  can  easily notice  that  the  wind  here  always  blows
from the west.”  “Really?” said  the  lady in  a surprised
tone,  “W hat an interesting thing!” But another tourist
said,  “You  must  be  wrong.  Look!  The  wind  is  blowing
from the east now.” A t the first moment the guide did
not know what to say. But he was a clever man and soon
found a way out.  “Oh,” he said,  “Is that so? W ell,  then
it  must be  the  west  wind  coming back.”



Упражнение 64
The English king Richard the Lionheart was atall,
strong  man.  He  was  very  proud  of  his  strength  and
liked  to  show people  how  strong  he  was.  Once,  as  he
was riding on horseback in the countryside,  his horse
lost a shoe. Luckily he was not far from a village and
soon  he  found  a blacksmith.  “Give  me  a  good  horse
shoe,” he said to the man. The blacksmith gave the king
a horseshoe.  Richard took it in his hand and broke it
in two.  “This horseshoe is no good,” he said,  “give me
abetter one.”  The blacksmith  did not say a word.  He
gave  the  king  another  horseshoe,  but  Richard  broke
it,  too.  The  blacksmith  gave  him  a  third  shoe.  This
time Richard was satisfied and ordered the blacksmith
to shoe his  horse.  When the work was done,  Richard
offered the man a coin.  The blacksmith took the coin
between  his  fingers  and broke  it  in  two.  Now  it  was
Richard’s turn to be surprised.  He took a larger coin
out  of  his  pocket  and  handed  it  to  the  blacksmith.
The man broke it,  too,  saying,  “This coin is no good,
give me a better one.” Richard smiled and gave the man
a gold coin.

Упражнение 65
In  the  fifteenth  century  people  knew  only  three
continents: Europe, Asia and Africa. They knew noth
ing about  such a big continent as America*  The  man
who discovered America was born in 1451 in Italy. His
name was  Christopher  Columbus.  He became  a  sailor
at  an  early  age.  Knowing  that  the  Earth  was  round,
he decided to reach India sailing to the west.  He tried
to arrange an expedition, but did not have money, and
nobody wanted to help him. At last the king of Spain
gave him the money for the expedition.  He set sail in
1492.  The  voyage  was  very  dangerous  and  difficult.
On  the  12th  of October  his  ship  reached  land.  When
they landed, they saw strange trees and flowers. Olive-



skinned  men  and  women  gathered  around the  sailors
and looked at them with great surprise. Columbus was
sure that he had discovered a new way to India. Some
time later another sailor reached that land.  The name
of the sailor was Amerigo Vespucci. He understood that
it was a new continent.

Упражнение 66
1.  He’s looking for a plain shirt, but all the shirts
are  striped.  2.  I’m  looking for a pair of black  pants.
3.  She’s  looking  for  a  blouse.  Polka-dot  blouses  are
very popular this summer.  4.  I bought a new hat yes
terday. The shop assistant said it was the latest style.
5.  I  want  to  ask  you  to  accompany  me  to  the  shop.
I  must buy  a  dress.  6.  Where  did  you  buy  this  over
coat? — I bought it at a big store in Nevsky Prospect
on Tuesday. 7. My sister bought a blue hat on Wednes
day. The colour suits her very nicely as she has got blue
eyes. 8 .1 must buy a pair of new gloves. 9. Where is the
shoe department? — It is on the third floor. 10.1 think
the coat is a little tight.  11. We came to a big tailor’s
shop to find out if we could have a business suit made
to  order.  12.  I  don’t  like  the  hat  you  have  chosen.
The  colour  is  not  becoming  to  you.  13.  Here  is  the
department of ready-made clothes. Let’s go in and see
if we can buy a nice pair of trousers for you.  14. I am
going to give him a silk tie as a birthday present.  He
likes ties.

Упражнение 67
1.  Everyone  in  our  country  knows  Lomonosov,
the founder of the first Russian university. 2. Nekrasov,
a famous  Russian  poet,  described  the  life  of  Russian
peasants.  3.  I  don’t  want  to  miss  the  concert  which
will  take  place  at  the  Philharmonic  on  the  15th  of
April. 4. He graduated from the University of London



six years ago. Now he is a scientist. And though he is
a young scientist, his name is well known. 5. My aunt
is a teacher of physics.  6.  Yesterday I read a book by
Dickens, a famous English writer. 7 .1 am sorry, I don’t
know the way to the nearest cafe. I am a stranger here
myself.  8.  The  town  I  was  born  in  is  on  the  Volga.
9.  Who  is  the  author  of  this  book?  10.  A  quarter  of
an hour was left before the beginning of the concert.
We entered the hall and saw a group of pupils of our
school. We joined them.

Упражнение 68
1.  During the vacation I attended some interesting
lectures.  I  remember  two  of  the  lectures  best  of  all.
They were about Russian music.  2. I am sure he won’t
stay  in  town  for  the  vacation.  3.  Two  weeks  are  left
before the end of the school year. The examinations are
coming. On the first of June we shall take an exam in
literature. 4. Today is my day off. I am going to spend
the day in the country.  5.  My brother brought a new
book yesterday. When I looked at the title, I was very
glad:  it  was  the book  which  I  had  wanted  to  get  for
along time.  6.  My sister is acquainted with the actor
who played the leading part in the play you saw yester
day.  7. What river is the longest in Europe?  — Why,
what a strange question to ask! Any schoolboy can tell
you that it is the Volga.  8.  I am afraid you will have
a lot of trouble with this business.  9.  The day was not"
bright  yesterday.  The  sky  was  covered  with  clouds.
10. What a pity! I can’t come to the party tonight.

Упражнение 69
I  knew  a  man  who  had  travelled  a  lot  in  his  life.
He had visited many countries in the east and in the
west. He loved children and often told them interesting



stories. I remember some of the stories which he told me.
One  of  the  stories  was  about  an  adventure  he  had  had
in  London.  He  was  a  young  man  at  that  time  and  was
interested  in  the  history  of  architecture.  One  day  he
visited  one  of  the  towers  of  the  Houses  of  Parliament.
He  came  out  to  the  balcony  of  the  tower  and  began  to
look at the ornaments on the walls.  Then he climbed up
on  the  roof.  Suddenly  a  man  came  running  to  him  and
seized him by the arm.  He began shouting something in
English, but my friend knew only a few words of English
and  did  not  understand  him.  The  Englishman  called
a policeman.  The fact was that he had thought that the
Russian tourist wanted to kill himself by jumping from
the  top  of  the  tower.  Later,  when  everything  became
clear,  they  laughed  a lot  over  it.

Упражнение 70
One  day  a  father  of  a  rich  fam ily  took  his  son  on
a trip to the country with the  firm  purpose of showing
him how poor people can be. They spent a day and anight
at the farm of a very poor fam ily.  W hen they returned
from  their  trip,  the  father  asked  his  son,  “How  was
the  trip?”  “Very  good,  Dad!”  “Did  you  see  how  poor
people  can  be?”  the  father  asked.  “Yeah!”  “And  what
did  you  learn?”  The  son  replied:  “I  saw  that  we  have
a dog at home,  and they have four.  We have a pool that
reaches  to  the  middle  of  the  garden;  they  have  a river
that has no end.  We have imported lamps in the garden;
they have the stars.  Our patio reaches to the front yard;
they have a whole horizon.” When the little boy finished
speaking,  his  father  was  speechless.  His  son  added,
“Thanks,  Dad,  for showing me how poor we are.”

Упражнение 71
The room in which the boys were fed was a large stone
hall,  with  a  copper  at  one  end,  out  of  which  the  cook



took  gruel  which  he  put  into  each  bowl  at  mealtimes.
Each boy had one portion of gruel  and no more,  and on
Sundays  they  had  two  ounces  and  a  quarter  of  bread
besides.  The  bowls  never  needed  washing  —   the  boys
polished  them  with  their  spoons  till  they  shone  again.
A t  last  the  boys  got  so  wild  with  hunger  that  one  boy
said he was afraid he would some night eat the boy who
slept  next  to  him.  The  boys  believed  him.  A   council
was  held.  Oliver  was  chosen  to  go  up  to  the  cook  that
evening  after  supper  and  ask  for  more.  The  evening
arrived,  and the boys  took  their places.  The cook stood
at  the  copper.  The  gruel  was  served  out  and  disap
peared.  Then Oliver rose from the table  and  advancing
to  the  cook,  said  in  a  weak  voice,  “Please,  sir,  I  want
some more.” The cook was a healthy man, but he turned
pale.  “W hat?”  said  he  in  a  trembling  voice.  The  man
could  not believe  his  ears.

Упражнение 72

Many  years  ago  a  London  theatre  performed  a  play
in  which  there  was  a  great  storm  on  the  sea.  In  those
days theatres had no machines.  That is why the manager
hired  several  boys  to  make  the  waves  of  the  sea.  They
jumped  up  and  down  under  a  big  piece  of  sea-green
cloth. The boys received a shilling a night for their work.
They  worked  for  several  weeks.  But  then  the  manager
decided to pay them less money —  only sixpence a night.
So the boys  decided  to  go  on strike.  During the  perfor
mance,  when the storm began,  when the wind blew and
it was  raining,  the  sea remained  calm  —   there was  not
a single wave on it.  The angry manager lifted one comer
of  the  “sea”  and  said  to  the  boys,  “Make  waves,  boys,
make  waves!”  “Do  you  want  waves  for  a  shilling  or  for
sixpence?”  asked  a boy  in  aloud  voice.  “Oh,  for  a  shil
ling,”  answered  the  manager.  The  boys  began  to  jump
up  and  down,  and  did  it  so  well,  that  the  storm  looked
quite  real.



Упражнение 73
In the old days it was necessary for all the parts of
a  city  to  be  close  together,  in  order  that  a  defensive
wall might surround it, and the streets, therefore, were
made as narrow as possible. Many European cities began
with walls round them.  But in America there was little
need for defensive walls,  and that’s why many Ameri
can  cities  have been built  on  a regular  plan,  modified
a little according to natural surroundings.  The streets
in American cities,  instead of having names,  are num
bered,  and  so  when  one  has  once  understood  the  plan
of an American city,  it is very easy to  find one’s way
from  one  part  of  it  to  another.  The  old  part  of  New
York  lies  in  the  southern  half  of  Manhattan  Island,
and there the streets are narrow and twisted, as in the
towns  of  the  Old  World.  But  the  rest  of  the  streets,
with but few exceptions, all run in straight lines. There
is one street in the city,  however,  that does not follow
a straight line. And that is Broadway, New York’s most
famous street. It starts within sight of the dancing wa
ters of the  harbour and runs between  tall  skyscrapers
in the northwestern  direction.

Упражнение 74
Africa  is  a very  large  continent  lying  to  the  south
of Europe  and  to  the  southwest  of Asia  to  which  it  is
joined by the Isthmus  of Suez.  Less than one hundred
years  ago  men  knew  almost  nothing  of  the  middle
of  the  continent.  Travellers  from  Europe  made  long
journeys into the centre of it but they met with terrible
difficulties,  for  the  continent  is  covered  with  forests
full  of  fearful  wild  animals.  Some  travellers  died  of
hunger or thirst or strange illnesses,  others were killed
by  lions,  still  others  by  natives;  but  nevertheless  bold
men  were  found  ready  to  go  along  its  rivers  into  the
heart of Africa. The merchants who came from European
countries  had  a  lot  to  sell,  and  here  were  millions  of



people  ready  to  buy;  here  was  a  country,  the  richness
of which was unimaginable.

Упражнение 75
Robert Burns,  the son of a small farmer in Ayrshire,
was born on the 25th of January,  1759. His parents were
poor, so Bums did not get a good education.  He worked
hard as a ploughboy. He was fond of reading and always
had a ballad book before him at dinner. After the death of
his father Robert and his brother and sisters took over the
farm together.  Working in the fields Burns wrote many
wonderful songs.  However,  things became so bad on the
farm, that the poet decided to go to Jamaica hoping to get
a job on a plantation there.  Luckily some friends helped
Bums to publish a book of poems.  The book was noticed
and  praised  highly.  In  1786  Bums  went  to  Edinburgh,
and his book of poems opened the doors of rich Edinburgh
houses to a peasant with such a wonderful talent. In 1788 he
married Jean Armour and spent a peaceful and happy year.
The rest of his life story is a tale of the poet’s hardships.
The hard life ruined the poet’s health,  and on the 21st of
July,  1796, he died at the age of thirty-seven.

Упражнение 76
“Is there a post office near the house you live in?”
“Yes, there  is.  Go to  the corner of the  street  along
which trams run. Then turn to the left and walk a short
distance  down  the  street.  Do  not  cross  the  street,  of
course. You will see a sign over a door which says ‘Post
and Telegraph Office’.”

“Thank you very much. I am sure I shall find it with
out difficulty. I must buy (some) stamps, send a telegram
and  ask  whether  they  receive  parcels  there.  I  want  to
send a parcel to an old friend.  It will be her birthday in
a week. Perhaps you can tell me where I can find a shop
that sells nice things that one can give as presents?”



“Yes,  certainly.  There’s  a  very  good  shop  not  far
from here. You can easily walk there. Go straight down
the  street  that  you  will  see  directly  in  front  of  you
when  you  come  out  of  the  post  office  till  you  come  to
a wide  street  along  which  buses  and  trolleybuses  run.
Then  turn  to  the  left  again  and  almost  immediately
you  will  come  to  a  beautiful  shop  with  big  windows
full  of  all  sorts  of things.  I  am  sure you will  find  nice
presents  there.”

Упражнение 77
Up  to  the  end  of the  19th  century  it  was  the  law  in
England  that  if  a  man  was  unable  to  pay  a  debt,  even
a small one,  he could be imprisoned.  This imprisonment
might very well be for life,  as it was impossible for the
people in prison to work and so make money to repay the
sum  they  had  borrowed.  If they  had  friends  who  could
bring them materials to work with, they could work with
their hands,  sewing or making boots,  for instance.

The  great  English  novelist  Charles  Dickens  knew
a  great  deal  about  the  debtors’  prisons  from  personal
experience,  for when  he was  about  ten,  his  father was
imprisoned  for  his  debt,  and  the  whole  fam ily  had  to
go  and  live  with  him  in  the  prison  because  they  had
nowhere  else  to  live.  The  mother  and  the  children,
however,  could  leave  the  place  when  they  wished;  but
at ten o’clock every evening  the  great  gates were  shut
for  the  night,  and  no  one  could  leave  or  enter  until
morning.  Dickens  described  the  life  in  the  debtors’
prisons in some of his novels.  It was largely because of
Dickens’  sharp  criticism  that the English Government
was  finally  forced  to  do  away with  debtors’  prisons.

Упражнение 78
A t  the  beginning  of  the  19th  century  a  little  boy
was  born  in  the  fam ily  of  John  Dickens,  a  clerk  at



an  office  in  Portsmouth,  and  was  named  Charles.  He
had a sister who was'older than himself, and there were
several other children in the family; When Charles was
seven, he was sent to school. He was not a strong child.
He did not like to play cricket or football and spent all
his free time reading. In 1821 the family went to London,
and  little  Charles  left  behind  him  the  happiest  years
of his childhood.  His father had financial  difficulties,
and the family was getting poorer and poorer. The boy
had  to  give  up  his  studies.  Mr  Dickens  was  put  into
a debtors’ prison. Little Charles learned to know all the
horrors and cruelty of a large capitalist city. He had to
go to work at a blacking factory. He worked there from
morning till night. When his father came out of prison,
Charles was sent to school  for some time.  Soon he got
a job as a clerk. Then he learned stenography and became
a reporter in Parliament. In 1836 at the age of 24 Charles
Dickens published his first book.  It was a collection of
stories. The title of the book was Sketches by Boz. These
were followed by Pickwick Papers and Oliver Twist and
many other famous novels. Charles Dickers is one of the
greatest writers of the 19th century. His novels are now
translated into many languages of the world.

Упражнение 79
During  the  American  W ar  of  Independence,  the
commander  of  a small  unit  of soldiers  was  giving  or
ders  to  his  men  about a heavy  cannon  that  they were
trying  to  lift  to  its  place  at  the  top  of  some  fo rtifi
cation.  It  was  almost beyond  their  power  to  lift  the
weight,  and the commander kept shouting encourag
ing  words.  An  officer,  not  in  uniform ,  was  passing
by,  and  he  asked  the  commander  why  he  did  not
help the soldiers.  Greatly surprised,  the man turned
round and said proudly,  “Sir,  I am a corporal!”  “Oh,
you  are,  are  you?”  replied  the  officer:  “I  did  not
know  that.  I  beg  your  pardon,  Mr  Corporal.”  Then


he got off the  horse  he  was  riding  and,  taking  hold
of the rope  that  the men  were  pulling  at,  he  pulled
with  all  his  strength.  And  when  the  cannon  was  in
its place, he turned to the little great man and said,
“Mr Corporal, when you have another job like this and
have  not enough  men,  send  for  your  commander-in-
chief, and I shall gladly come and help you.” The cor
poral was struck with astonishment. The man who had
helped his soldiers was George Washington.

Упражнение 80
William  Shakespeare,  the  greatest  English  play
wright,  was  born  in  1564  in  Stratford-upon-Avon  in
England. Stratford is a small country town in a farming
district in the middle of England.  The Avon,  which is
a pretty river with grass and trees all along its banks,
runs through Stratford.  Not much is known of Shake
speare’s father. He was a farmer who, at different times
of his life, sold meat.and bought and sold wool. He was
poor and often had  money difficulties. Also very little
is  known  about  the  life  of  his  only  son  William.  The
little  house  in  which  the  great  writer  was  born  still
stands.  Now  it  is  a  museum.  William  went  to  school
in Stratford. In  1586 he went to London. Probably his
first occupation  there was  at  one  of the two  theatres
that were in London at that time.  Then he became an
actor and soon began to write plays for the company of
actors to which  he belonged.  Shakespeare bought  the
largest house in his home town in 1597, but he did not
spend much time there till 1610. He spent the last years
of his life mostly in Stratford, but he visited London
often.  He died in  1616.

Упражнение 81
What  is  computer  science?  You  might  think  it  is
a field about computers. However, it is said that сотри-


ter science is no more about computers than astronomy
is about telescopes.  Instead,  we can describe computer
science  as  the  study of process,  or how we  do things.
We could think of a process as a recipe. Using a recipe
as a metaphor, we can describe some of the main areas
of computer science:  how a recipe works (the study of
algorithms),  how a recipe is written (the study of pro
gramming languages and software development),  what
units  are  used  in  recipes  (data  structures),  and  what
recipes we like and why (the study of human-computer
interaction).
Why study computer science? Even if you never pro
gram for a living, you may occasionally find yourself in
a situation where you would like to make a software tool
do something that it doesn’t yet do.  If you are a busi
ness owner, you may want to create a website. If you are
a photographer, you may want to transform a hundred
photo files on your computer. If you are a scientist, you
may want to find the most common words in a historical
text. You could do it for a job, or as a hobby. And once
you  have  learned  how  to  write  simple  programs,  you
may find yourself having a lot of fun.

Упражнение 82
Rarely  has  the  economic  ascent  of  two  relatively
poor nations  been  watched  with  such  awe.  The  post
war era witnessed the economic miracles in Japan and
South Korea. But neither was large enough to influence
the worldwide growth or change the game in multiple
industries.  China  and  India,  by  contrast,  possess  the
weight  and  dynamism  to  transform  the  21st  century
global economy. Never has the world seen the simulta
neous, sustained takeoffs of two nations that together
account for one third of the planet’s population.

What  makes the  two  giants  especially  powerful  is
that they complement each other’s strengths.  Techni-



cal  and  managerial  skills  in both China and  India are
becoming more important than cheap collective labour.
China  stays  dominant  in  mass  m anufacturing,  and
is  one  of  the  few  nations  building  multibillion-dollar
electronics and heavy industrial plants. India is a rising
power  in  software,  design,  services,  and  precision
industry. Its software industry barely existed 15 years
ago  but  is  growing  rapidly  today.  How  these  Asian
giants integrate with the rest of the world will largely
determine the  21st century global economy.

Упражнение 83
1.  George Bernard Shaw, a well-known English play
wright,  was  bom  in  Ireland  in  1856.  He  was  the  son
of a clerk and had to begin working at an early age. At
the age of twenty he moved to London where he became
a journalist.

2.  The play Widowers’ Houses shows the egoism and
hypocricy of some businessmen who got their profits from
the London slums where the poorest people lived.

3.  W hile  travelling  in  Germany  H arry  Trench,
a young  English  doctor,  got  acquainted  with  Mr  Sar
torius, a respectable-looking gentleman, and his daugh
ter  Blanche.  The  young  people  fell  in  love  with  each
other and were going to get married. Trench knew that
Sartorius was rich,  but he did not know what kind  of
property he had.  He learned about it from a conversa
tion with Lickcheese, Sartorius’ rent collector. It turned
out  that  Sartorius  was  the  owner  of  some  tenements
in London slums, and that all the property he had was
built  on  money  of  the  poor  people  who  lived  there.
Trench  was  greatly shocked.  He did  not want  to  take
money  from  Blanche’s  father.  But  Blanche  said  she
could  not  live  on  the  small  income  Trench  had.  They
had  a quarrel,  and  Trench  left  the  house.  A fter  some



time Trench learned that the land on which Sartorius’
houses were built belonged to Trench’s aunt and that he
himself was living on the money got in the same way.
Everything  comes  out  “all  right”  in  the  end:  Trench
marries  Blanche  and  becomes  a  partner  in  Sartorius’
business.  The  author  shows  that  in  fact  Trench  is  no
better than Sartorius,  Lickcheese and the like.

Упражнение 84
My husband picks up the local newspaper every morn
ing from  a vending machine  on  our way to  work.  The
other morning, a girl who appeared to be about six was
in front of him in line, buying the paper for her mother,
who was sitting in the car. The child put the money for
one paper in the slot and took two newspapers!

My husband said to her, “Oh, is this two-for-one day?”
The child did not reply. She just took the two  newspapers
to her mother.

This is stealing, pure and simple. I wonder what this
mother is  going  to  think  when  her  daughter becomes
a teen  and  gets  arrested  for shoplifting  at  the  mall?
I suppose she’ll wonder where her daugter got the idea
that it is OK to take something without paying for it.
The mother missed an opportunity to teach her  child
right from wrong. If the child took the extra newspaper
in error,  the mother should have instructed her to put
it back.  However,  if she did  not object to it  — shame
on her.

Упражнение 85
Three bank  robbers  got  a  surprise  last  night.  This
is  what  happened.  The  three  robbers,  who  all  worked
as cleaners at a hospital, drove up to the bank on Main
Street.  The three men wearing masks over their faces
got  out  of  the  car  and  ran  into  the  bank.  Inside  the



bank, they pointed guns at the customers and bank tell
ers.  One of the men told all  the customers to lie down
on the floor. Then one of the other men said something
like,  “Quick,  the  money!  Give  me the  money!”  So  one
of the tellers handed them some bags. After leaving the
bank,  the three  men  jumped  into  their  van  and  drove
off.  One mile down  the road,  the  robbers  parked  their
van  next  to  an  ambulance  they  had  parked  before  the
robbery.  They  got  into  the  ambulance  and  drove  off.
They  went  straight  to  their hospital.  After  leaving
the ambulance in the hospital parking lot, the three men
went together into a small room. There, they opened the
bags  of  money  they  had  been  given  —   and  got  a very
unpleasant surprise! The bank teller had given the rob
bers  special  bags  containing  bright  red  ink!  The  red
ink is released when the bag is opened,  and it can’t be
washed  off.  So  suddenly,  the  men  found  themselves
covered  with  red  ink!  As  the  men  left  the  room  and
tried to leave  the  hospital,  an  emergency  room doctor
saw them and she thought, “Oh God, they’re all covered
with blood.” So she tried to help them but they refused
her  help  and  ran  off.  The  doctor  realized  something
funny was going on and she called the police. The police
caught  the  robbers  —  guess  where?  Outside  the  bank
on Main Street.

Упражнение 86
A  tsunami is a natural phenomenon consisting of
a series of waves  generated  when water in  a lake  or
a  sea  is  rapidly  displaced  on  a  massive  scale.  It  is
also a very large dangerous ocean wave caused by an
underwater explosion, earthquake, etc. Earthquakes,
landslides,  volcanic  eruptions  and  large  meteorite
impacts all have the potential to generate a tsunami.
The effects of a tsunami can range from unnoticeable
to devastating.



The m agnitude 9.0 Indian Ocean Earthquake trig
gered  a  series  of  lethal  tsunam is  on  December  26,
2004  th a t  killed  over  310,000  people  (more  th an
220,000  in  Indonesia  alone),  making  it  the  deadli
est tsunam i in recorded  history.  The tsunam i killed
people  over  an  area  ranging  from   the  im m ediate
vicinity  of  the  quake  in  Indonesia,  Thailand  and
the  north-w estern  coast  of  M alaysia  to  thousands
of kilometres away in Bangladesh,  India, Sri Lanka,
the Maldives, and even as far as Somalia, Kenya and
Tanzania  in  eastern  A frica.  The  disaster  prom pted
a huge  worldwide  effort  to help  victim s  of  the  tra
gedy,  w ith  hundreds  of  m illions  of  dollars  being
raised for disaster relief.

Упражнение 87
Association football,  more commonly known as foot
ball  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  soccer  in  Canada  and
the  United  States,  is  the  world’s  most  popular  sport.
Sometime called The Beautiful Game,  it is a team sport
played between two teams of eleven players with a ball.
Although the origins of football can be traced to Ancient
China and Ancient Greece,  the rules of modern football
were created in England by The Football Association in
1863.

Today  football  is  played  by  more  than  240  million
players in over 200 countries. It is governed by the Inter
national Federation of Association Football (FIFA).  The
main international competition in football is the World
Cup, which is organised by UFA every four years. About
200 national teams compete in qualifying tournaments,
and only 32 teams make it to the final competition. Mil
lions of people go to a stadium to watch a game. Billions
of people watch football on TV or on the internet, making
it the most viewed sport.



Упражнение 88
The Grand Canyon is a geological and scenic wonder
that  is  known  throughout  the  world.  Located  in  the
United States in Northern Arizona, it is 446 kilometres
long,  up  to  29  kilometres  wide  and  has  a depth  of  up
to  1.8 kilometres.

The Grand Canyon is a world-famous geological site.
The  canyon’s  walls  contain  rock  layers  th at  expose
nearly  two  billion  years  of  E arth’s  history.  Geologic
studies began in the  19th century and continue today.
One of the biggest questions is how the Colorado River
chose its course and began carving the canyon. The area
contains several major ecosystems and is home to over
1500 plant and over 400 animal species.

For thousands of years, the area has been inhabited by
Native Americans. In the early 1800s, the United States
government started to send expeditions to explore and
map  the  canyon.  The  area  received  federal  protection
in  1893 as a forest reserve.  Later,  in  1919,  it received
national park status. Today The Grand Canyon National
Park receives almost five million visitors each year.
