
ПРИЧАСТИЕ

She watched the children writing the dictation.
Writing the dictation, he made only one mistake.
The dictation written the day before was corrected.

Упражнение 377
Переведите на русский язык, обращая внимание

на причастия.

1. Everybody looked at the dancing girl. 2. The little
plump woman standing at the window is my grandmother. 3. The man playing the piano is Kate's uncle.
4. Entering the room, she turned on the light. 5. Coming to the theatre, she saw that the performance
had already begun. 6. Looking out of the window,
he saw his mother watering the flowers. 7. Hearing
the sounds of music, we stopped talking. 8. She went
into the room, leaving the door open. 9. Working at his
desk, he listened to a new CD. 10. Frankly speaking,
he has made a terrible mistake. 11. Looking through
the newspaper, she noticed a photograph of her boss.
12. Using chemicals, the firemen soon put out the fire
in the forest.

 0 6



Упражнение 378
Замените придаточные определительные предложения причастными оборотами.

1. All the people who live in this house are students. 2. The woman who is speaking now is our secretary. 3. The apparatus that stands on the table in
the corner of the laboratory is quite new. 4. The young
man who helps the professor with his experiments
studies at our university. 5. People who borrow
books from the library must return them on time.
6. There are many pupils in our class who take part
in all kinds of extracurricular activities.

Упражнение 379
Замените придаточные предложения причины

причастными оборотами.

1. As he now felt more at ease, the man spoke in
a louder voice. 2. Since he knew who the man was,
Robert was very pleased to have the chance of talking
to him. 3. As he thought that it was his brother at
the window, Steve decided to open it. 4. As the people
were afraid of falling into a ditch in the darkness at
any moment, they felt their way about very carefully. 5. Since he needed a shelter for the night,
Peter decided to go to the neighbours' house.

Упражнение 380
Замените придаточные предложения времени причастными оборотами ( не опускайте союз when).

1. You must have more practice when you are
learning to speak a foreign language. 2. When you

Причастие

307

speak English, pay more attention to the word order.
3. When you are copying English texts, pay attention to the articles. 4. When you begin to work with
the dictionary, don't forget my instructions. 5. Be
careful when you are crossing a street. 6. When
you are leaving the room, don't forget to switch off
the light. 7. When they were travelling in Central
Africa, the explorers met many wild animals.

Past Participie = Participie II

III форма глагола

broken — сломанный, разбитый
written — написанный
eaten — съеденный

Упражнение 381
Переведите на русский язык, обращая внимание

на Past Participle.

1. She put a plate of fried fish in front of me.
2. The coat bought last year is too small for me now.
3. Nobody saw the things kept in that box. 4. My
sister likes boiled eggs. 5. We stopped before a shut
door. 6. Tied to the tree, the goat could not run away.
7. They saw overturned tables and chairs and pieces
of broken glass all over the room. 8. This is a church
built many years ago. 9. The books written by Dickens
give us a realistic picture of the 19th century England.
10. The stolen money was returned to the bank. 11. It's
no good crying over spilt milk.





Сравните употребление Participle I (ing-форма)

_________и Participle II (III форма глагола)
taking — берущий, беря
doing — делающий, делая

taken — взятый
done — сделанный

Упражнение 382
Переведите на русский язык, обращая внимание

на Participle I и Participle II.
1. a) A letter sent from St Petersburg today will be
b) He saw some people in the post office sending
c) When sending the telegram, she forgot to
2. a) Some of the questions put to the lecturer yesb) The girl putting the book on the shelf is our new
c) While putting the eggs into the basket, she

in Moscow tomorrow.
telegrams.
write her name.
terday were very important.

librarian.
broke one of them.

3. a) A fish taken out of the water cannot live.

careful.
text.

b) A person sunbathing on the beach must be very
c) Taking a dictionary, he began to translate the
4. a) A line seen through this crystal looks double.
b) A teacher seeing a mistake in a student's
dictation always corrects it.
c) Seeing clouds of smoke over the house, the girl
cried, “Fire! Fire!”
5. a) The word pronounced by the student was not
difficult.
b) The man standing at the door of the train
carriage and saying goodbye to his friends is
a well-known musician.

Причастие

309
с) Standing at the window, she was waving her
6. a) The right word spoken at the right time may

hand.

have very important results.

b) The students speaking good English must help

their classmates.

c) The child was interested in the talking doll.
d) While speaking to Nick some days ago, I forgot

to ask him about his sister.

ч

Упражнение 383
Выберите из скобок требующуюся форму причастия.
1. a) The girl (writing, written) on the blackboard
b) Everything (writing, written) here is quite
2. a) We listened to the girls (singing, sung) Rusb) We listened to the Russian folk songs (sing3. a) The girl (washing, washed) the dishes is my
b) The dishes (washing, washed) by Kate looked
4. a) Who is that boy (doing, done) his homework
b) The exercises (doing, done) by the pupils were
5. a) The house (surrounding, surrounded) by tall
b) The wall (surrounding, surrounded) the house
6. Read the (translating, translated) sentences once

is our best pupil.
right.
sian folk songs.
ing, sung) by the girls.
sister.
very clean.
at that table?
easy.
trees is lovely.
was very high.

more.

 1 0

.

7. Name some places (visiting, visited) by you last

8. I picked up the pencil (lying, lain) on the floor.
9. She was reading the book (buying, bought) the day

year.

before.

10. Yesterday we were at a conference (organizing,

organized) by the pupils of the 10th form.

11. (Taking, taken) the girl by the hand, she led her

across the street.

12. It was not easy to find the (losing, lost) stamp.
13. I shall show you a picture (painting, painted) by

14. Here is the letter (receiving, received) by me

15. Do you know the girl (playing, played) in the garHogarth.

yesterday.

den?

turned) to me.

come) to us.

brother.

very interesting.

blackboard.

dark clouds.

16. The book (writing, written) by this scientist is

17. Translate the words (writing, written) on the

Ann.

18. We could not see the sun (covering, covered) by

19. The (losing, lost) book was found at last.
20. (Going, gone) along the street, I met Mary and

21. Look at the beautiful flowers (gathering, gathered) by the children.

22. His hat (blowing, blown) off by the wind was

lying in the middle of the street.

23. “How do you like the film?” he asked, (turning,

24. When we came nearer, we saw two boys (coming,

25.1 think that the boy (standing, stood) there is his

Причастие

311

Сравните употребление

Present Participle и Perfect Participle

buying — покупая
having bought — купив

Упражнение 384
Раскройте скобки, употребляя глаголы в Present

Participle или Perfect Participle.

1. (to do) his homework, he was thinking hard.
2. (to do) his homework, he went for a walk. 3. (to sell)
fruit, he looked back from time to time, hoping to see
his friends. 4. (to sell) all the fruit, he went to see his
friends. 5. (to eat) all the potatoes, she drank a cup
of tea. 6. (to drink) tea, she scalded her lips. 7. (to
run) in the yard, I fell and hurt my knee. 8. (to look)
through some magazines, I came across an interesting
article about UFOs. 9. (to write) out and (to learn)
all the new words, he was able to translate the text
easily. 10. (to live) in the south of our country, he
cannot enjoy the beauty of St Petersburg's White
Nights in summer. 11. (to talk) to her neighbour in
the street, she did not notice how a thief stole her
money. 12. (to read) the story, she closed the book
and put it on the shelf. 13. (to buy) some juice and
cakes, we went home. 14. (to sit) near the fire, he
felt very warm.

Формы причастия
Active

Passive
being written
haying been written
written

Present
Perfect
Past

writing
having written





Как переводить разные формы причастия

на русский язык:

Формы
причастия
reading
having read
being read

having been
read
read
building
having built
being built

having been
built
built

Как их переводить

причастием

читающий

—

читаемый
(т. е. который
читают)

—

прочитанный
строящий

—

строящийся
(т. е. который
строят)

—

деепричастием

читая
прочитав
будучи читаемым
(т. е. когда его читали)
будучи прочитанным
(т. е. когда его прочитали)
будучи прочитанным
(т. е. когда его прочитали)

—

строя
построив
будучи строящимся
(т. е. когда его строили)
будучи построенным
(т. е. когда его построили)
будучи построенным
(т. е. когда его построили)

построенный

—

Упражнение 385
Переведите на русский язык, обращая внимание

на причастия.

1. The boy lay sleeping when the doctor came.
2. The broken arm was examined by the doctor.
3. While being examined, the boy could not help crying. 4. Having prescribed the medicine, the doctor
went away. 5. The medicine prescribed by the doctor
was bitter. 6. The dress bought at the department

Причастие

313

store was very beautiful. 7., W hile using a needle,
you should be careful not to prick your fin g er.
8. W hile crossing the street, one should first look
to the left and then to the right. 9. People w atching
a performance are called an audience. 10. Being very
ill, she could not go to school. 11. The first rays of
the rising sun lit up the top of the hill. 12. The tree
struck by lightning was all black and leafless. 13. Being busy, he postponed his trip. 14. The door bolted
on the inside could not be opened. 15. Having been
shown the wrong direction, the travellers soon lost
their way. 16. The room facing the garden is much
more com fortable th an  th is one. 17. H aving descended the m ountain, they heard a man calling for
help. 18. Flushed and excited, the boy came running
to his mother. 19. He stood watching the people who
were coming down the street shouting and waving
their hands.

Обратите внимание на способы перевода
на английский язык русских причастий:

действительный
залог

страдательный
залог

е
и
т
с
а
ч
и
р
П

несовершенный вид
совершенный вид
несовершенный вид ■
совершенный вид

бросающий,
бросавший
бросивший

throwing
нельзя1
нельзя1

бросаемый

being thrown

брошенный thrown

1 Действительное причастие совершенного вида (а также
тельным предложением (who threw, who has thrown, who had

несовершенного вида прошедшего времени) может быть переведено на английский язык только придаточным определиthrown).





Обратите внимание на способы перевода
на английский язык русских деепричастий:
throwing

брЬсая

действительный
залог

страдательный
залог

Ф s
о CO
T
s CL
c
Ф
Ф
l=[

несовершенный вид
совершенный вид
несовершенный вид
совершенный вид

бросив

будучи
*
бросаемым
будучи
брошенным

having
thrown
being thrown

being thrown
having been
thrown

Упражнение 386
Переведите следующие русские причастия и деепричастия на английский язы к.

Приносящий, принесенный, принося, принеся,
переводящий, переведенный, переводя, переведя,
давая, написав, читающий, берущий, данный, прочитав, сделанный, пьющий, сказанный, будучи потерянным, нарисовав, написавший, делая, взятый,
взяв, рисуя, выпитый, сделав, идя, пиш;дций, прочитанный, дав, рисующий, делающий, нарисованный, выпив, говорящий, беря, написанный, читая,
идущий, дающий, сказав, сидевший, посмотрев, будучи забыт, строящий, строящийся, играя, поиграв,
рассказанный, рассказавший, видя, принесший,
будучи принесенным, построенный, продав.

Упражнение 387
В следующих предложениях употребите, где возможно, причастия вместо глаголов в личной форме. Изменяйте конструкцию предложения, где необходимо.

1. When he was running across the yard, he fell.
2. When I was going home yesterday, I kept thinking

Причастие

315

about my friend. 3. He put on his coat, went out and
looked at the cars which were passing by. 4. She closed
the book, put it aside and looked at the children who
were running about in the yard. 5. As the book was
translated into Russian, it could be read by everybody. 6. As we were given dictionaries, we managed
to translate the article easily. 7. As soon as I have
done my homework, I shall go for a walk. 8. As soon
as I have bought the book, I shall begin reading it.

Упражнение 388
Раскройте скобки, употребляя требующуюся фор-

му причастия.

1. (to write) in very bad handwriting, the letter
was difficult to read. 2. (to write) his first book, he
could not help worrying about the reaction of the critics. 3. (to spend) twenty years abroad, he was happy
to be coming home. 4. (to be) so far away from home,
he still felt himself part of the family. 5. She looked
at the enormous bunch of roses with a happy smile,
never (to give) such a wonderful present before.
6. (not to wish) to discuss that difficult and painful
problem, he changed the subject. 7. (to translate) by
a good specialist, the story preserved all the sparkling
humour of the original. 8. (to approve) by the critics,
the young author's story was accepted by a serious
magazine. 9. (to wait) for some time in the hall, he
was invited into the drawing room. 10. (to wait) in
the hall, he thought over the problem he was planning to discuss with the old lady. 11. They reached
the oasis at last, (to walk) across the endless desert
the whole day. 12. (to lie) down on the soft couch,
the exhausted child fell asleep at once. 13. She went
to work, (to leave) the child with the nurse. 14. (to
phone) the agency, he left (to say) he would be back
in two hours.





Упражнение 389
Замените выделенные части предложений причастными оборотами. Изменяйте конструкцию
предложения, где необходимо.

1. When he arrived at the railway station, he
bought a ticket, walked to the platform and boarded
the train. 2. As he was promised help* he felt calmer.
3. After he was shown in, he was told to take off his
coat and wait for a while. 4. Robinson started the
building of the house at once and finished it before
the season of rains set in. 5. He poured out a cup
of coffee, sat down in an armchair and looked at
the woman who was sitting opposite him. 6. When
he had left the house and was crossing the street,
he suddenly stopped as he remembered that he had
forgotten to take his tablets. 7. He looked at me and
hesitated: he did not know what to say. 8. As he had
lived long in those parts and knew the place very
well, he easily found his way to the marketplace.
9. He has no language problems, because he has
been studying English for a long time. 10. After I had
written this exercise, I began to doubt whether it was
correct. 11. Be careful when you cross the street.
12. Students should always be attentive when they
are listening to the lecturer. 13. There are many
students who study music. 14. Don't you feel tired
after you have walked so much?

Упражнение 390
Переведите на английский язык, употребляя требующуюся форму причастия.

1. Артистка, рассказывающая детям сказки
по радио, знаменита на всю страну. 2. Ребенок
всегда с интересом слушает сказки, рассказываемые няней. 3. Рассказывая ребенку сказки,
она говорит разными голосами, имитируя героев
сказок. 4. Рассказав ребенку сказку, она пожела-

ла ему спокойной ночи. 5. Сказка, рассказанная
няней, произвела на ребенка большое впечатление.
6. Моя бабушка, рассказавшая мне эту сказку,

Причастие

317

живет в маленьком домике на берегу озера.

бующуюся форму причастия.

Упражнение 391
Переведите на английский язык, употребляя тре1. Мальчик, бегущий мимо дома, вдруг останоменя. 3. Услышав шаги, он поднял голову. 4. Выпив чашку чая> она почувствовала себя лучше.
5. Играя в саду, дети не заметили, что стало темно.

вился. 2; Будучи очень занят, он не сразу услышал
6. Подойдя к двери, он открыл ее. 7. Том подошел
лав уроки, дети пошли гулять. 13. Лежа на диване,
ту, ребенок начал играть. 15. Прочитав много книг

к смеющейся девочке. 8. Он положил на стол смятое письмо. 9. Плачущая девочка была голодна.
10. Бабушка смотрела на детей, играющих во дворе.
11. Она любит смотреть на играющих детей. 12. Сдеон читал книгу. 14. Принеся свои игрушки в комнаДиккенса, он хорошо знал этого писателя.

Независимый причастный оборот

(Nominative Absolute Participial Construction)

The day being piercing
cold, he had no desire to
loiter.

Так как лень был пронн-
зывакчие холодным, он
не имел желания медлить.

Переведите на русский язык, обращая внимание

Упражнение 392

на независимый причастный оборот.

1. The weather being cold, he put on his overcoat.
2. The weather having changed, we decided to stay





where we were. 3. You can set your mind at ease,
all being well. 4. There being no chance of escape,
the thief was arrested on the spot. 5. Oliver knocked
weakly at the door and, all his strength failing
him, sank near the door. 6. The bridge having been
swept away by the flood, the train didn't arrive.
7. There being little time left, they took a cab to get
to the theatre in time. 8. It being cold and damp,
a fire was lighted for the weary travellers to warm
themselves by. 9. It being pretty late, they decided
to postpone their visit. 10. The hour being late,
she hastened home. 11. The sun having set an hour
before, it was getting darker. 12. The weather being
very warm, the closet window was left open. 13. And
the wind having dropped, they set out to walk.
14. The vessel being pretty deep in the water and
the weather being calm, there was but little motion.
15. The next morning, it being Sunday, they all went
to church. 16. For the moment the shop was empty,
the mechanic having disappeared into a room at
the back. 17. There being nothing else on the table,
Oliver replied th at he wasn't hungry. 18. Mrs
Maylie being tired, they returned home more slowly.
19. Their search revealing nothing, Clyde and she
walked to a corner. 20. The wind being favourable,
our yacht will reach the island in no time. 21. I had
long tasks every day to do with Mr Mell, but I did
them, there being no Mr and Miss Murdstone here.
22. It being now pretty late, we took our candles and
went upstairs. 23. He being no more heard of, it was
natural to forget everything. 24. He started about
five, Riggs having informed him that the way would
take him three hours. 25. Our horses being weary,
it was agreed that we should come to a halt. 26. It
having been decided that they should not go out on
account of the weather, the members of the party
were busy writing their notes. 27. The wind stirring

Причастие

319

among trees and bushes, we could hear nothing.
28. The resistance being very high, the current in
the circuit was very low. 29. This material being
a dielectric, no current can flow through it.

His story told, he leaned
back and sighed.

Когда его история была
рассказана, он откинулся
назад и вздохнул.

Упражнение 393
Переведите на русский язык, обращая внимание

на независимый причастный оборот.

1. His directions to the porter finished, he came
up to his niece. 2. Dinner being over, we assembled
in the drawing room. 3. The fifth of June arriving,
they departed. 4. This being understood, the conference was over. 5. The constraint caused by the old
man's presence having worn off a little, the conversation became more lively. 6. This done, and Sikes
having satisfied his appetite, the two men lay down
on chairs for a short nap. 7. The concert being over,
the lottery came next. 8. Dinner being over, the old
lady asked Barbara to come and sit on the sofa near
her. 9. Then, the house search proving that she was
not there, Asa went outside to look up and down
the street. 10. A ll the necessary preparations having
been made with utmost secrecy, the army launched
an attack. 11. The treaty having been signed, trade
was at once resumed. 12. About eleven o'clock,
the snow having thawed, and the day being finer and
a little warmer than the previous one, he went out
again. 13. The cathode heated, the electrons leave
the surface and move to the anode. 14. Electrons moving through a wire, electrical energy is generated.


his papers, his long
white hands moving

Sir Henry was deep in

nervously.



Сэр Генри был погружен
в свои бумаги, Причем
(а) его длинные белые

руки нервно двигались.

на независимый причастный оборот.

Упражнение 394
Переведите на русский язык, обращая внимание

1. Then they heard the noise of the plane, its shadow passing over the open glade. 2. She remembered
him talking, his glasses m agnifying his round blue
eyes. 3. She sat staring into the fire, the sock forgotten on her knee. 4. He heard the bathers coining up
the sandy road, their voices ringing through the quiet.
5. They continued their way, the boy sobbing quietly,
the man ashamed. 6. They went down the stairs together, Aileen lingering behind a little. 7. He lifted
the lid and kept it in his hand while she was drinking,
both standing. 8. She danced light as a feather, eyes
shining, feet flying, her body bent a little forward.
9. We walked home very slowly, Agnes and I admiring the moonlight, and Mr Wickfield scarcely rising
his eyes from the ground. 10. They walked quickly
through street after street, the Dodger leading and
Oliver at his heels. 11. He was standing there silent,
a bitter smile curling his lips. 12. The dog sat close
to the table, his tail thumping now and again upon
the floor, his eyes fixed expectantly on his master.
13. The electrons move with varying velocities, their
velocity depending on the temperature and nature
of the material. 14. Any moving object can do work,
the quantity of kinetic energy depending on its mass
and velocity. 15. Radio was invented in Russia, its

inventor being the Russian scientist A .S . Popov.

Причастие

321

She stood silent, her lips
pressed together.

Она стояла молча,
п л о тн о сжав губы.

Упражнение 395
Переведите на русский язык, обращая внимание

на независимый причастный оборот.

1. She stood listlessly, her head dropping upon
her breast. 2. She rose from the bed and removed
her robe and stood motionless, her head bent, her
hands clasped before her. 3. Pale-lipped, his heart
beating fast, Andrew followed the secretary. 4. Jack
sat silent, his long legs stretched out. 5. The speaker
faced the audience, his hand raised for silence.
6. He sat down quickly, his face buried in his hands.
7. Clyde sat up, his eyes fixed not on anything here
but rather on the distant scene at the lake. 8. She hurried along, her heels crunching in the packed snow.

Then she sprang away
and ran around the desks
and benches, with Tom
running after her.

Потом она отскочила и
побежала вокруг парт и
скамеек, а Том бежал за
ней.

Упражнение 396
Переведите на русский язык, обращая внимание

на независимый причастный оборот.

1. Little Paul sat with his chin resting on his
hand. 2. He stood with his arms folded. 3. Lanny
stood looking at the lorry rolling away, with his
cheek burning and his fists clenched. 4. She stood
there with her brows frowning, her blue eyes looking





before her. 5. Не leant a little forward over the
table, with his wrists resting upon it. 6. And then
came the final moment, with the guards coming for
him. 7. He slowly and carefully spread the paper on
the desk, with Lowell closely watching. 8. She was
standing on the rock ready to dive, with the green
water below inviting her. 9. Twenty minutes later
he came out of Number Seven, pale, with his lips
tightly compressed and an odd expression on his
face. 10. Little Oliver Twist was lying on the ground,
with his shirt unbuttoned and his head thrown back.
11. The girl wandered away, with tears rolling down
her cheeks. 12. The moonlit road was empty, with
the cool wind blowing in their faces. 13. She sat on
the steps, with her arms crossed upon her knees.
14. Then, with her heart beating fast, she went up
and rang the bell.

Упражнение 397
Перефразируйте следующие предложения, употребляя независимый причастный оборот.

1. As our work was finished, we went home. 2. If
the letter is posted today, the news will reach them
tomorrow. 3. If mother permits us, we shall go to
the theatre. 4. When the working day was over,
she went straight home. 5. As a storm was arising,
the ship entered the harbour. 6. When the packing
had been done, the girls left for the station. 7. As
the stop was a long one, the girls got off the train.
8. As the weather was perfect, Lydia played tennis
every day. 9. As the last month was a very busy one,
she could not answer her friend's letter. 10. If time
permits, we shall come a few days earlier. 11. When
the third tfell had gone, the curtain slowly rose.
12. As the underground station was not far, we

Причастие

323

walked there. 13. Bill could not sleep the whole
night, as there was something wrong with his eye.
14. As the rules were very strict, the doorkeeper
did not permit Bill to enter. 15. As the front door
was open, she could see straight through the house.
16. Rip had no desire to work on his farm, for it was
to his mind the worst piece of land in the neighbourhood. 17. They stood there; the night wind was
shaking the drying whispering leaves. 18. As the situation was urgent, we had to go ahead. 19. When
the greetings were over, Old Jolyon seated himself
in a wicker chair. 20. The town of Crewe is known
to be one of the most busy junctions in England:
many railway lines pass through it. 21. We set off;
the rain was still coming down heavily. 22. After
a private sitting room had been engaged, bedrooms
inspected and dinner ordered, the party walked out
to view the city. 23. Dinner was served on the terrace, as it was very close in the room. 24. Thoughtful, Andrew finished his omelette; his eyes were all
the time fixed upon the microscope. 25. In fact there
was nothing to wait for, and we got down to work.
26. The question was rather difficult to answer at
once, and Tasked permission to think it over. 27. He
stood leaning against the wall, his arms were folded.
28. There was very little time left; we had to hurry.
29. Of an evening he read aloud; his small son sat by
his side. 30. The new engines were safely delivered,
all of them were in good order. 31. Our efforts to
start the car had failed, and we spent the night in
a nearby village.

Запомните следующее предложение:
shall go for a walk.

Time permitting.
Если время п о з в о ли т (если будет время).
мы пойдем гулять.





Упражнение 398
Переведите на английский язык, употребляя независимый причастный оборот.

1. Если погода позволит, мы пойдем на каток.
2. Так как все было готово, она решила отдохнуть.
3. Так как было уже поздно, они никуда не пошли.
4. Так как погода была холодная, Джек спрятал руки
в карманы. 5. Так как быстро темнело, она поспешила домой. 6. Когда солнце зашло, сразу стало
темно. 7. Так как наш разговор был закончен, я
пошел домой. 8. Когда письмо было написано, она
быстро побежала на почту отправить его. 9. Так
как оставалось еще полчаса до отхода поезда, мы
решили поужинать на вокзале. 10. Если погода
будет благоприятной, спортсмены могут показать
хорошие результаты. 11. Мы долго разговаривали:
он задавал мне вопросы, а я охотно на них отвечал.
12. Если условия позволят, я приеду к вам на лето.
13. Так как было очень тепло, дети спали на открытом воздухе. 14. Когда все приготовления были
закончены, мы отправились в поход. 15. Корабль
медленно плыл вдоль берегов Белого моря; сотни
птиц кружились над ним. 16. Было очень темно,
так как на небе не было ни одной звездочки. 17. Когда солнце село, туристы развели костер. 18. Так как
было очень поздно, собрание было закрыто.
