
ПРИЧАСТИЕ, ГЕРУНДИЙ

И ОТГЛАГОЛЬНОЕ
СУЩЕСТВИТЕЛЬНОЕ

Обратите внимание на различные значения ing-формы:

В следующих предложениях reading — причастие:
Му brother is reading a book.
In the library you can see many people reading books.
Reading his newspaper, the old man fell asleep.

В следующих предложениях reading — герундий:
Reading a good book gives me a lot of pleasure.
It is no use reading these notes.
I like reading a good book.
I am thinking of reading a new A. Christie book.
I remember reading a very clever article on market
economy.

Сравните эти два предложения:

Му brother is reading the latest story by R. Bradbury.
причастие
My dream is reading the latest story by R. Bradbury.
герундий

Герундий и отглагольное существительное 347

Упражнение 426
Расположите по порядку:
a) предложения, в которых ing-форма является

причастием;

герундием.

b) предложения, в которых ing-форма является

1. We all listened with great interest to the speaker
criticizing the new book. 2. Criticizing the work of
our sports club, he said that it was not satisfactory.
3. They were criticizing the government for its failure to limit air pollution at that moment. 4. I have
no objection to your criticizing me. 5. When we entered the classroom, we saw our students writing at
the desks. 6. Do you mind my writing with your pen?
7. He was writing a letter when I entered the room.
8. Lydia could retell the English story she had read
without looking into the book. 9. Everybody ran to
meet the people returning from the city. 10. They
went home quickly, protecting themselves from
the rain by walking under the trees. 11. Át this factory much attention is paid to protecting the health
of the workers. 12. He stopped writing and looked
around. 13. In this picture you can see a young man
giving flowers to a girl. 14. Playing volleyball is
a popular sport for young people. 15. She left the room
without saying a word. 16. We had the pleasure of
seeing the performance. 17. John likes studying history. 18. Never jump off a moving train. 19. Reading
books out of doors is his favourite way of spending the
summer holidays, but he likes swimming and going
on excursions as well. 20. Running water is always
better than standing water. 21. The remaining cakes
were given to the children. 22. The cakes, remaining
from the evening, were given to the children. 23. You
can learn what the new words mean by looking them





up in the dictionary. 24. Before going to meet his
friend, he went home to change his clothes. 25. They
went out to meet the returning women. 26. Returning
home after a good holiday is always pleasant. 27. Returning home after a good holiday, he looked the picture of health.

Упражнение 427
Расположите no порядку:
a) предложения, в которых ing-форма является
b) предложения, в которых ing-форма является

причастием;

герундием.

1. Не was looking at the plane flying overhead.
2. Wishing to learn to skate, she bought herself
a pair of skates. 3. Just imagine his coming first in
the race! 4. The children were tired of running.
5. Being frightened by the dog, the cat climbed a high
fence. 6. It is no use going there now. 7. Coming out
of the wood, the travellers saw a ruined castle in
the distance. 8. My greatest pleasure is travelling.
9. A growing percentage of the population are taking holidays abroad. 10. Growing corn on his desert
island, Robinson Crusoe hoped to eat bread one day.
11. Growing roses takes a lot of care and attention.
12. Having prepared all the necessary equipment,
they began the experiment. 13. Mary will stay for
a few days at the seaside before going back home.
14. While translating the text, I looked up many words
in the dictionary. 15. I usualy help mother by washing the dishes and doing the rooms. 16. Entering the
room, I saw my friends smiling at me. 17. Instead of
phoning his friend, he went to see him. 18. The boys
continued playing football. 19. Watching the playing kittens was great fun for the children.

Герундий и от глагольное сущ ест вит ельное

349

Сравните герундий и отглагольное существительное:

Reading a good book gives
me a lot of pleasure.

герундий

The reading o f a good book
gives fae a lot of pleasure.

отглагольное
существительное

Упражнение 428
Расположите по порядку:
a) предложения, в которых ing-форма является

герундием;

b) предложения, в которых ing-форма является

отглагольным существительным.

1. The singing of those beautiful folk songs
impressed me greatly. 2. Your having written us is
really no excuse for your not coming on the day fixed.
3. Such doings can hardly be explained. 4. The motor
was carefully examined before starting. 5 .1 am very
pleased to meet you after hearing so much about you.
6. Your hair wants cutting. 7. I shall look forward
to seeing you again. 8. Building this school will cost
too much money. 9. Sleeping is necessary. 10. We felt
so disappointed at your having missed nearly half the
programme. 11. It was no use talking about it any
longer. 12. Are you dressed for going out? 13. Then
came a general lighting of pipes and cigars. 14.1 hate
the idea of doing it once more. 15. But you don't
mind being asked to help us, do you? 16. The forest
resounded with the hooting of owls and the howling
of wolves. 17. She blamed herself for having been
a dull companion.





Упражнение 429
Расположите по порядку:
a) предложения, в которых ing-форма является
b) предложения, в которых ing-форма является
c) предложения, в которых ing-форма является

причастием;
герундием;
отглагольным существительным.

1. The driving wheel of the machine is broken.
2. Driving in a motor car, we passed many villages.
3. We have every chance of passing our exams well.
4. Having been knocked down by a passing car,
the poor man was taken to hospital at once. 5. You
don't know what you miss, not having the desire to
listen to good music. 6. These happenings are remarkable. 7. Travelling is a pleasant way of improving
one's education. 8. Happily we escaped being delayed
on our way. 9. I was told of a great friendship existing between the two captains. 10. It is no use crying
over spilt milk. 11. Asking him for help is useless.
12. Every company arranges for the marketing of its
products. 13. There are many discoveries being made
all over the world. 14. Seeing this man, I recollected
perfectly well having met him many years before.

Упражнение 430
Расположите no порядку:
a) предложения, в которых ing-форма является
b) предложения, в которых ing-форма является
c) предложения, в которых ing-форма является

причастием;
герундием;
отглагольным существительным.

1. Sitting by her sleeping child, the worried mother
at last began to realize by its peaceful breathing that

Герундий и отглагольное существительное 351
all danger was over. 2 .1 stopped knocking at the door
and, sitting down at the top of the stairs, began
waiting for my father to come. 3. W ith a sudden
tightening of the muscles he became aware of a figure walking noiselessly beside him. 4. She praised
herself for having come. 5. Having stopped crying,
the child quieted down to hard thinking. 6. The old
clock kept ticking on the mantelpiece, as if counting the seconds left before the coming of daylight.
7. Remembering that time was like going back to his
childhood and reliving those happy days. 8. Looking
back upon that time, he realized how happy he had
been then. 9. Tom lived there like a paying guest,
attracting very little attention of the others.

Упражнение 431
Расположите no порядку:
a) предложения, в которых ing-форма является
b) предложения, в которых ing-форма является
c) предложения, в которых ing-форма является

причастием;
герундием;
отглагольным существительным.

1. We sat by the riverside listening to the running
of the water. 2. The cleaning of the room was done
by the girls. 3. Working in the garden is very good
for the health. 4. Going home from the theatre, they
were discussing the play they had seen. 5. You should
think before .speaking. 6. A fter finding the new
word in the dictionary, I wrote it down and went
on reading. 7. He spent so much time on reviewing
his lecture notes. 8. What do you mean by saying
that? 9. The students found the reading of English
newspapers rather difficult at first. 10. Instead of
going home after school, the girls went for a walk.
11. Chalk is used for writing on the blackboard.
12. Stop making excuses!

?

;
