
УСЛОВНЫЕ ПРЕДЛОЖЕНИЯ.

СОСЛАГАТЕЛЬНОЕ

НАКЛОНЕНИЕ ПОСЛЕ “I WISH”

Запомните три типа условных предложений:

If the weather Is fine,
we shall play outside.

If .you ring me up.
1 shall tell you some-
thing.
If the weather were
fine, we should play
outside.

If you rang me up,
1 should tell vou
something.

If the weather had
been fine, we should
have played outside.

1

II

III

Если погода будет хорошая, мы будем играть
на открытом воздухе.

Если ты мне позвонишь, я тебе кое-что
расскажу.
Если бы погода была
хорошая (сегодня; завтра), мы бы играли на
открытом воздухе.

Если бы ты мне позвонил (сегодня, завтра),
я бы тебе кое-что рассказал.
Если бы погода была
хорошая (вчера), мы
бы играли на открытом
воздухе.

If you had runo me up,
1 should have told you
something.

Если бы ты мне позвонил (вчера), я бы тебе
кое-что рассказал.

Условные предложения

383

Упражнение 470
Раскрывая скобки, напишите каждое предложение три раза, образуя условные предложения I, II
и III типов.

• E.g. If you (to be) free, I (to come) to see you.
If you are free, I shall come to see you.
If you were free, I should come to see you.
If yóubad been free, I should have come to see you.
If I (to see) her, I (to be) glad.
If I see her, I shall be glad.
If I saw her, I should be glad.
If I bad seen her, I should have been glad.

1. If you (to be) busy, I (to leave) you alone. 2. If
my friend (to come) to see me, I (to be) very glad.
3. If mother (to buy) a cake, we (to have) a very nice
tea party. 4. If he (to send) an e-mail, we (not to
worry). 5. If you (not to work) systematically, you
(to fail) the exam. 6. If I (to live) in Moscow, I (to
visit) the Tretyakov Art Gallery every year. 7. If I (to
get) a ticket, I (to go) to the Philharmonic. 8. If I (to
live) near a forest, I (to gather) a lot of mushrooms.
9. If my father (to return) early, we (to watch) TV
together. 10. If she (to know) English, she (to try)
to enter the university.

Упражнение 471
Перепишите каждое из следующих предложений
дважды, образуя предложения нереального условия:
a) относящиеся к настоящему или будущему

(II тип);

b) относящиеся к прошедшему (III тип).
1. If I am not too busy, I shall go to the concert.
2. They will all be surprised if I make such a mistake.
3. If he doesn't come on time, shall we have to wait for





him? 4. If no one comes to help, we shall be obliged to
do the work ourselves. 5. If you put on your glasses,
you will see better. 6. What shall we do if they are
late? 7. Will you be very angry if we don't come?
8. Will he be very displeased if I don't ring him up?

Упражнение 472
Произнесите вслух все возможные условные предложения I типа, используя подстановочную таблицу.
(Упражнение на выработку автоматизма речи.)

I shall

If I

live in the south,
come home late,
live in the country,
go to the forest,
receive his letter,
fall ill,
find my book,
lose my money,
see my friend,

swim every day.
go to bed at once,
often go to the forest,
gather many mushrooms,
be very happy,
go to the doctor,
be very glad,
be very sorry,
ask his advice.

Упражнение 473
Произнесите вслух все возможные условные предложения II типа, используя подстановочную таблицу.
(Упражнение на выработку автоматизма речи.)

I wish

I were

If I

were

in the south
at home
in the country
in the forest
at the camp
a scientist
a composer
a poet
a writer
a spaceman
a sailor

I should swim every day.

go to bed.
go to the forest.
gather many mushrooms,
have a very good time,
invent a time machine,
write beautiful music,
write beautiful poetry,
write interesting novels,
fly to other planets.
sail to Africa.

Условные предложения

385

Упражнение 474
Произнесите вслух все возможные условные предложения III типа, используя подстановочную таблицу.
(Упражнение на выработку автоматизма речи.)

I should

have

I wish
I had

If I

had

yesterday

yesterday

translated the article
met you yesterday
read this new book
seen your brother
bought a dictionary
done my homework
rung him up yesterday
gone to the library
had more practice in
joined you in fishing
had a ticket yesterday
asked you to help me
called at that shop
called on my friend

chess

yesterday
won the championship
heard about it yesterday

to our place.

this discovery.

found out all about
told you something,
told you about it.
asked him to come
translated the text,
got a good mark,
found out all about
caught a lot of fish,
gone to the theatre
done the work well,
bought the book,
met interesting

his illness.
got that book.
won the game yesterday.

last night.

people.
been sent abroad.
been pleased.

¡

Упражнение 475
Раскройте скобки, употребляя глаголы в требу1. If he were not such an outstanding actor, he
(not to have) so many admirers. 2. If you (to give)

ющейся форме.





me your address, I shall write you a letter. 3. If
she (not to be) so absent-minded, she would be
a much better student. 4. If my sister does not go to
the south, we (to spend) the summer in St Petersburg
together. 5. If they (not to go) to Moscow last year,
they would not have heard that famous musician.
6. If you (not to get) tickets to the Philharmonic,
we shall stay at home. 7. If you were not so careless about your health, you (to consult) the doctor.
8. I should be delighted if I (to have) such a beautiful fur coat. 9. If it (to rain), we shall have to stay
at home. 10. If he (to work) hard, he would have
achieved great progress. 11. If it is not too cold,
I (not to put) on my coat. 12. I (to write) the essay
long ago if you had not disturbed me. 13. If he (not
to read) so much, he would not be so clever. 14. If my
friend (to be) at home, he will tell us what to do.

Упражнение 476
Раскройте скобки, употребляя глаголы в требующейся форме,

1. If you (not to buy) coffee, we shall drink tea.
2. If he is free tomorrow, he certainly (to come) to our
party. 3. My brother would not have missed so many
lessons if he (not to hurt) his leg. 4. If my friend
(to work) in my office, we should meet every day.
5. If you spoke English every day, you (to improve)
your language skills. 6. If you get a “five”, your
mother (to be) happy. 7. If she (to return) earlier,
she would have been able to see him before he left.
8. If these shoes were not too big for me, I (to buy)
them. 9. If you (to ring) me up, I shall tell you
a secret. 10. If you (to be) a poet, you would write
beautiful poetry. 11. If he did not read so much, he
(not to know) English literature so well. 12. If he

Условные предложения

387

(to come) to our house yesterday, he would have met
his friend. 13. If he (not to pass) his exam, he will
not get a scholarship. 14. If she (not to help) me,
I should have been in a very difficult situation.
15. My father would have more free time if he (not to
read) so many newspapers. 16. If only you had let me
know, I (to go) there immediately. 17. If I were a famous singer, I (to get) a lot of flowers every day.

Упражнение 477
Раскройте скобки, употребляя глаголы в требующейся форме.

1. If my brother (to be) in trouble, I shall help
him, of course. 2. If I don't manage to finish my
report today, I (to stay) at home tomorrow. 3. If she
were more careful about her diet, she (not to be) so
stout., 4. You would not feel so bad if you (not to
smoke) too much. 5. If he (to learn)'4he poem, he
would not have got a bad mark. 6. If you gave me
your dictionary for a couple of days, I (to translate)
this text. 7. If I (to be) a musician, I should be very
happy. 8. If Barbara (to get) up at half past eight,
she would have been late for school. 9. If you had
not put the cup on the edge of the table, it (not to
get) broken. 10. I should be very glad if he (to come)
to my place. 11. If he (to live) in St Petersburg, he
would go to the Hermitage every week. 12. If you
(to go) to the theatre with us last week, you would
have enjoyed the evening. 13. You won't understand
the rule if you (not to listen) to the teacher. 14. If
he weren't such a bookworm, he (not to spend) so
much time sitting in the library. 15. I should not
have bought the car if my friend (not to lend) me
money. 16. If he did not live in St Petersburg, we
(not to meet) so often. 17. If he had warned me,
I (to do) the work in time.





Упражнение 478
Раскройте скобки, употребляя глаголы в требующейся форме.

1. If it (to snow), the children will play snowballs.
2. If I (not to know) English, I should not be able to
enjoy Byron's poetry. 3 .1 (not to do) it if you did not
ask me. 4. If men (to have) no weapons, would wars
be possible? 5. You will never finish your work if you
(to waste) your time like that. 6. If I (to have) his
telephone number, I should easily settle this matter
with him. 7. If I (to have) this rare book, I should
gladly lend it to you. 8. The dish would have been
much more tasty if she (to be) a better cook. 9. He
never (to phone) you if I hadn't reminded him to do
that. 10. Your brother (to become) much stronger
if he took cold baths regularly. 11. If he (to be) more
courageous, he would not be afraid. 12. If the fisherman had been less patient, he (not to catch) so much
fish. Í3. If you (to put) the ice cream in the freezer,
it would not have melted. 14. If I (to know) the result
now, I would phone her immediately. 15. If you had
let me know yesterday, I (to bring) you my book.

Упражнение 479
Раскройте скобки, употребляя глаголы в требующейся форме.

1. If she (to ask) me yesterday, I should certainly
have told her all about it. 2. If you (to do) your morning exercises every day, your health would be much
better. 3. If he is not very busy, he (to agree) to go
to the museum with us. 4. If I (not to be) present at
the lesson, I should not have understood this difficult
rule. 5. If he reads fifty pages every day, his vocabulary (to increase) greatly. 6. If they (to know) it before,
they would have taken measures. 7. If I (to get) this
book, I shall be happy. 8. If you really loved music,

Условные предложения

389

you (to go) to the Philharmonic much more often. 9. If
you had not wasted so much time, you (not to miss)
the train. 10. If you (not to miss) the train, you would
have arrived on time. 11. You (not to miss) the teacher's explanation if you had arrived on time. 12. You
would have understood the rule if you (not to miss)
the teacher's explanation. 13. If you (to understand)
the rule, you would have written the,paper successfully. 14. If you had written the paper successfully,
you (not to get) a “two”. 15. Your mother (not to scold)
you if you had not got a “two”. 16. If your mother (not
to scold) you, you would have felt happier.

Упражнение 480
Раскройте скобки, употребляя глаголы в требующейся форме.

1. If it (to rain) tomorrow, our game will be
cancelled. 2. If a dog (to bite) her on the leg, she
would go straight to hospital. 3. If he had known it
was going to rain, he (to take) his umbrella to work
today. 4. If only I (to have) more pocket money,
I could buy some new English books. 5. If she hadn't
missed the bus, she (not to be) late for work. 6. If
I (to live) two hundred years ago, I couldn't have
spoken on the telephone. 7. If my daughter did her
homework carefully, she (to get) much better marks.
She's really a smart little girl. 8. If his friend (to
be) in the mood ip see a film, they would have gone
to the cinema last night. 9. If my cactus (not to
have) a rare disease, it wouldn't have.died* 10. If
they had remembered your address, they (to send)
you a postcard. 11. If Tom saw a car crash, he (to
telephone) the police and (to help) the people in the
cars. 12. If you are not sure what to say you (to have)
to guess. 13. If she (not to be) very ill, she wouldn't
have been absent from English classes all last week.
14. If my parents had had good seats, they (to enjoy)



390
the play last night. 15. If a robber (to attack) him
in a dark street, he would defend himself. 16. If
he hadn't been so careless, he (not to fall) into this
trap. 17. If you (not to smoke), you would feel more
energetic. 18. If her alarm clock (to ring), she would
have been on time for work this morning.

Упражнение 481
Раскройте скобки, употребляя глаголы в требующейся форме.

1. If you were on a hijacked plane, you (to attack)
the hijackers? 2. If they were on a hijacked plane,
they (to stay) calm and probably (to survive). 3. If
my friend had been trying harder, he (to succeed).
4. If I (to live) in 1703, I shouldn't (wouldn't ')1
have had a computer. 5. If she (to smell) smoke in
the middle of the night, she would telephone the fire
brigade and run into the street and shout, “Fire!”
6. If lie (to invite), he would have come to the party
last Sunday. 7. If the driver in front hadn't stopped
suddenly, the accident (not to happen). 8. If you (not
to know) how to play, my sister will explain the rules
to you. 9. If she had told them it was her birthday,
they (to give) her a birthday present. 10. If I had
more time, I (to read) more books. 11. If their TV
had been working, they (to watch) the President's
speech last night. 12. If my T-shirt hadn't been
100 percent cotton, it (not to shrink) so much.
13. How can you become more popular in your class:
if you (to get) the top mark in mathematics or En-

1 В современном английском языке имеется тенденция
к употреблению would вместо should С первым лицом единственного и множественного числа в главном предложении
условных придаточных предложений Пи III типов. См.: Raymond
Murphy “Essential Grammar in Use'* a book for intermediate
students: Unit 38 —  If I knew his number, I would phone him.

Условные предложения

391
glish or if you (to be) good at sports? 14. If they (to
go) by car, they would have saved time. 15. If I (to
be) a bird, I would1 be able to fly. 16. If he (to bring)
his book home, he would have done his homework last
night. 17. If my mother (to win) a million pounds,
she would spend1 it as fast as possible. 18. If you had
been feeling well, you (to be) in class yesterday.

Упражнение 482
Раскройте скобки, употребляя глаголы в требующейся форме.

■?f' i: * ' -i..-'

.

1. I am sorry that you do not read English novels; if you (to read) them, I (to lend) you some very
interesting ones. 2. You say that you did not read
yesterday's papers; if you (to read) them, you (to
see) the announcement of Professor X's coming to
our town. 3. He is not ill: if he (to be) ill, he (not to
play) tennis so much. 4. He was not ill last week: if he
(to be) ill, he (not to take) part in the football match.
5. How slippery it is! If it (not to rain), it (not to be) so
slippery. 6. I am glad I was able to attend the lecture
yesterday. You (to be) displeased if I (not to come)?
7. Let's take a taxi to the railway station: we have
a lot of luggage. If we (not to have) so much luggage,
we (to walk). 8. Stop working and let's go inside: it
is too dark. If the evening (not to be) so dark, we (to
continue) the work. 9. I don't believe you: you only
say that you want to know languages. If you (to be)
really interested in languages, you (to study) them.

Упражнение 483
Образуйте условные предложения.
1. Не is busy and does not come to see us. If ...
2. The girl did not study well last year and, received

гСм. примечание на с. 390.





bad marks. If ... 3. Не broke his bicycle and so he
did not go to the country. If ... 4. He speaks English badly: he has no practice. If ... 5. I had a bad
headache yesterday, that's why I did not come to
see you. If ... 6. The ship was sailing near the coast,
that's why it struck a rock. If ... 7. He was not in
town, therefore he was not present at our meeting.
If ... 8. The pavement was so slippery that I fell and
hurt my leg. If ... 9. The sea is rough, and we cannot sail to the island. If ... 10. They made a fire,
and the frightened wolves ran away. If ... 11. It is
late, and I have to go home. If ... 12. I was expecting my friend to come, that's why I could not go to
the cinema with you. If ... 13. He always gets top
marks in mathematics because it is his favourite
subject and he works a lot on it. If ... 14. I did not
translate the article yesterday because I had no dictionary. If ... 15. We lost our way because the night
was pitch-dark. If ... 16. The box was so heavy that
I could not carry it. That's why I took a taxi. If ...

Упражнение 484
Образуйте условные предложения.
1. The travellers had no camera with them, so
they could not take photos of the beautiful scenery.
If ... 2. There was no sugar left, so we had to go to
the shop late in the evening. If ... 3. This house is
very nice and comfortable, but it is not very good
for living because it is situated close to a chemical
plant and the air around is very bad. If ... 4. He is
an excellent specialist, but I cannot ask his advice
because I am not acquainted with him. If ... 5. You
cannot enjoy this merry birthday party because you
have a toothache. If ... 6. You know the material well
enough, but you are very absent-minded, and that's

Условные предложения

393
why you always make many mistakes. If ... 7. You
did not ring me up, so I did not know you were in
trouble. If ... 8. You left the child alone in the room,
so he hurt himself. If ... 9. They spent a year in
the tropics, so they got very sun-tanned. If ... 10. It
rained heavily, so we got drenched to the skin. If ...
11. Why didn't you watch the cat? It ate all the fish.
If ... 12. A huge black cloud appeared from behind
the forest, so we had to turn back and hurry home.
If ... 13. We shall not go to see them because it is
very late. If ... 14. Naturally she was angry, because
you were in her way. If ...

Упражнение 485
Раскройте скобки, употребляя требующуюся фбр-

му сослагательного наклонения после I wish.

1..I wish I (to have) a season ticket to the Philharmonic next winter. 2. I wish I (to consult) the teacher
when I first felt that mathematics was too difficult for me. 3. I love sunny weather. I wish it (to
be) warm and fine all the year round. 4. I wish
I (not to lend) Nick my watch: he has broken it.
5. I wish you (to send) word as soon as you arrive.
6. I wish I (not to have) to do my homework every
day. 7. I wish you (to go) skiing with me yesterday:
I had such a good time! 8. I wish I (to know) Spanish.
9 .1 wish I (not to drink) so much coffee in the evening:
I could not sleep half the night. 10. I wish you (to
read) more in future. 11. I wish I never (to suggest)
this idea. 12. I wish I (to be) at yesterday's party: it
must have been very merry. 13. I wish we (to meet)
again next summer. 14. Don't you wish you (to see)
that performance before? 15. They wished they (not
to see) this horrible scene again. 16. The unfortunate
pupil wished he (not to forget) to learn the rule.





Упражнение 486
Раскройте скобки, употребляя требующуюся форму сослагательного наклонения после I wish.

1. I wish I (can) give up smoking. 2. She wishes
she (to see) him at yesterday's party. 3. I wish I (to
pass) my driving test last Monday. 4. I wish I (not
to forget) my friend's birthday yesterday. 5. The boy
is sad. He wishes he (not to break) the window.
6. My aunt wishes she (to stay) at home last weekend. 7. He wishes he (to know) something about cars.
8. I wish it (to be) sunny. 9. I wish it (to be) sunny
during our picnic last Saturday. 10. She wishes she
(to live) in the Crimea. 11. My friend wishes he (not
to do) that last week. 12. I wish I (to bring) my camera last summer. 13. I wish I (can) tell the future.
14. Do you wish you (to be) in the Guinness Book of
Records? 15. Some people wish they (can) appear on
a TV game show and become famous. 16. She often
wishes things (to be) different.

Упражнение 487
Перефразируйте следующие предложения, употребляя I wish.

• E.g.

It's a pity you are ill.
I wish you were not ill.

1. Unfortunately they won't return before Christmas. 2. The student was sorry he had not studied
the material better and had shown such poor knowledge at the exam. 3. It's a pity that you did not send
for us last night. 4. It's a pity you are not with us
these days. 5. What a pity you don't know enough
physics. 6. He was sorry not to have had enough time
to finish his paper. 7. It's a pity we shan't be able
to reach home before teatime. 8. I am sorry I made

Условные предложения

395

you upset by telling you this news. 9. My friend
regrets not having gone to university. 10. My friend
regrets not having entered the university.

Упражнение 488
Переведите на английский язык, употребляя

I wish.

1. а) Жаль, что он такой легкомысленный.

б) Жаль, что он недостаточно серьезен.

2. а) Я теперь жалею, что не послушал его совета.
б) Я теперь жалею, что последовал его совету.

3. а) Жаль, что вы пришли так поздно.

б) Жаль, что вы не пришли пораньше.

4. а) Обидно, что мы ушли до его прихода.

б) Обидно, что мы не дождались его прихода.
5. а) К сожалению, они еще ничего не знают.

* б) К сожалению, они уже знают об этом.

Упражнение 489
Переведите на английский язык, употребляя

I wish.

1. Ах, если бы вы сказали ей об этом в прошлое воскресенье! 2. Хорошо бы у нас сейчас
были каникулы. 3. Если бы он пришел сегодня
вечером! 4. Мы пожалели, что не попросили его совета. 5. Жаль, что вы отказались принять участие
в пикнике. 6. Жаль, что вас не интересует этот
предмет. 7. Мы бы хотели, чтобы вы упомянули
эти факты. 8. Жаль, что мы опоздали на поезд.
9. Жаль, что вы включили телевизор так поздно.
10. Если бы я был свободен сейчас! 11. Жаль, что
и вчера у меня было мало времени. 12. Хорошо бы
вы написали ей об этом сами. 13. Жаль, что вы не
обратили внимания на его предупреждение. 14. Он



396
пожалел, что бросил университет. 15. Жаль, что
уже поздно идти туда. 16. Ах, если бы я пришел на
вокзал вовремя! 17. Жаль, что вы не читали такую
прекрасную книгу. 18. Жаль, что она делает так
много ошибок в речи. 19. Жаль, что вы не побывали на выставке. 20. Жаль, что я узнал об этом
так поздно. 21. Как жаль, что мы не застали Колю
дома. 22. Она сожалела, что не рассказала нам эту
историю раньше.

Обратите внимание на смешанные случаи

употребления времен в условных предложениях

II и III типа:

If I were acquainted with this famous professor,

I should have rung him up yesterday.

Условие относится к настоящему времени (// тип),

а следствие — к прошедшему (IH тип).

If I had written the composition yesterday, I should

be free now.

Условие относится к прошедшему времени (///тип),

а следствие — к настоящему (// тип).

Упражнение 490
Образуйте условные предложения. Не забудьте

о смешанных случаях.

1. I shall go to the dentist because I have a toothache. If ... 2. He is groaning with pain now because
he did not go to the dentist to have his tooth filled.
If ... 3. She doesn't go to the clinic because she does
not need any treatment. If ... 4. I shan't go to see
the play as I was present at the dress rehearsal. If ...
5. He went to Moscow specially to hear this famous
singer because he is fond of him. If ... 6. We did
not go to the cafeteria to have a glass of lemonade

Условные предложения

397

because we were not thirsty. If ... 7. She could not
mend her dress herself because she had no needle.
If ... 8. He is not a first-class sportsman now because
he did not train enough last year. If ... 9. The pupils were active because they wanted to understand
this difficult material. If ... 10. The pupils did not
understand the homework because they were inattentive. If ... 11. The pupils worked hard and did
well in their exams. If ... 12. She won't try to enter
the foreign languages department because she is not
good at foreign languages. If ...

Упражнение 491
Переведите на английский язык.
1. Он так изменился! Если бы вы его встретили,
вы бы его не узнали. 2. Если бы я был на вашем
месте, я бы посоветовался с родителями. 3. Если
бы сейчас подошел трамвай, мы бы не опоздали.
4. Если бы он знал, что это вас расстроит, он был
бы осторожнее. 5. Если бы вы мне помогли решить эту задачу, я был бы вам очень благодарен.
6. Жаль, что нам раньше не пришло в голову
поискать книгу в библиотеке. Мы бы сделали
работу вовремя и сейчас были бы уже свободны.
7. Жаль, что у нас было так мало уроков. Если бы
мы больше поработали, мы бы лучше знали язык.
8. Если бы он регулярно не ходил на тренировки,
он не добился бы такого успеха на состязаниях.
9. Если бы ты предупредил меня заранее, я бы
уже был в Москве. 10. Жаль, что она уже ушла.
Если бы ты позвонил раньше, она была бы сейчас
здесь. 11. Если бы он был умнее, он бы не пошел
вчера на вечеринку. 12. Если бы она не прислала
вчера это письмо, мой брат был бы сейчас дома.
13. Что бы мы сейчас делали, если бы мама не ис-





пекла вчера пирог? 14. Жаль, что вы не слышали
музыку Рахманинова. Если бы вы ее слышали,
вы бы знали, какой это замечательный композитор. 15. Я уверен, что все были бы рады, если бы
вечеринка состоялась.

Упражнение 492
Переведите на английский язык.
1. Если бы я знал французский, я бы уже давно поговорил с ней. 2. Если бы я знал немецкий
язык, я бы читал Гете в оригинале. 3. Если бы я
жил близко, я бы чаще заходил к вам. 4. Если
бы вы не прервали нас вчера, мы бы закончили
работу в срок. 5. Если бы он не следовал советам
врача, он бы не поправился так быстро. 6. Если бы
он не был талантливым художником, его картину
не приняли бы на выставку. 7. Если бы вы тогда
послушались моего совета, вы бы не были сейчас
в таком затруднительном положении. 8. Если бы
я не был так занят в эти дни, .я бы помог тебе
вчера. 9. Если бы он не был так близорук, он бы
узнал меня вчера в театре. 10. Она здорова. Если
бы она была больна, ее брат сказал бы мне об этом
вчера. 11. Вы бы много знали, если бы регулярно
читали этот журнал. 12. Если бы я узнала об этом
раньше, то не сидела бы сейчас дома. 13. Если
бы мои родители были богаты, они бы уже давно
купили мне машину. 14. Она очень талантлива.
Хорошо бы родители купили ей пианино. Если
она начнет играть сейчас, она будет выдающимся
музыкантом.
